(Dis)Loyal Alliances: A Transnational Cold War Network of Power


Project background:
In the early days of the Cold War, George Kennan, an American diplomat and historian and the architect of containment, devised a plan for using political refugees from the Eastern Bloc as political and psychological warfare, a conduit to riling up the Eastern European nations against the Soviet-controlled regimes in their countries, and eventually against the Soviet Union. It was to be a win-win plan: the refugees would gain political and financial support from the United States government, and the US would gain entry behind the Iron Curtain and into the minds of Eastern Europeans. However, the story of rescue turned into a story of abandonment. In 1956, on the streets of Budapest, Americans were not coming and countless Hungarians were murdered. 


Kennan leaves tremendous intriguing memos. If we ponder Kennan’s rhetoric in proposing this plan—his word choice, turns of phrase, tone, sequence of the argument—we get some interesting insights into how US officials perceived the promised rescue mission. 


Throughout the Cold War, (Radio Free Europe) RFE was consistently a powerful presence in the lives of Eastern Europeans, who tuned to it to hear familiar voices, delivering in their own languages, a message of hope that the end of communism was near. The listeners glomming on to their radios to hear the voices of RFE broadcasters, thus engaging in risky clandestine activity, also heard something else. They heard what they took to be the sympathy and support of private Americans who believed in their suffering and wished to alleviate it.




Project progress:
Though line 20,22,25,31,32 documents are particularly blurry and unable to read most of them, we successfully generated the rest of the PDF files to the text files and extracted sorted names by applying the self-designed Python algorithm. Based on the result, we have conducted dummy variables and a frequency table of names. The distribution of names seems to be scattered and nonlinear. Particularly, it is worth noticing that “Imre Nagy” appears 20 times on the file “out_text_1912.txt” and “Allen Dulles” appears 27 times on the file “35.txt” respectively. These two outliers constitute the major deviation and lead to a further discussion. 


On the file “out_text_1912.txt”, it predominantly revolves around the relationship between “Imre Nagy” and RFE. In addition, heated debate about whether Nagy is a hero also predisposes to the complexity of Nagy’s political attributes. “Nagy is a much greater hero now than he was at any time before and during the revolution up to the time he was arrested, except for the day” and “Certainly RFE was right in questioning the motives of a Communist leader”. Imre Nagy was a Hungarian communist politician who served as Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Hungarian People's Republic from 1953 to 1955. In 1956 Nagy became leader of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 against the Soviet-backed government, for which he was sentenced to death and executed two years later.


On the file “35.txt”, the name “Allen Welsh Dulles” appears 27 times and it is crucial to understand who Dulles is and what he did during that period of time. Allen Welsh Dulles, head of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) during the early Cold War, was responsible for communicating East European political reformers and offering economic, information assistance. In the context, Dulles clearly marked the expectation of the U.S. government and urged political refugees to behave as he instructed. “Secretary Dulles replied that all that they had sought was authority to barter goods with countries behind the Iron Curtain. Moreover, he added, he had not in mind asking anything more of the Congress by way of authority in this area.” and “At this point, Mr. Allen Dulles expressed concern about the content of paragraph 23, reading as follows:"As all means of encouraging the eventual establishment of freely elected governments in the satellites end not as an end in itself, be prepared on a case-by-case basis to assist "National Communist” movements where U. S. and free world cohesion would not be jeopardized thereby. While avoiding the appearance of encouraging the export of Tito'’s
Coxrminisa, use Yugoslavia's unique position in Fastern Europe to promote the weakening of the Soviet grip on the satellite countries.” Thus, it explicitly indicates the significance of Allen Welsh Dulles.