Digital Archive

- digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org
International History Declassified

 

W Wilson
Center
April 30, 1948

George F. Kennan, 'The Inauguration of Organized
Political Warfare’

Citation:

“George F. Kennan, ‘The Inauguration of Organized Political Warfare',” April 30, 1948, History and
Public Policy Program Digital Archive, National Archives and Records Administration, Record Group
59, Entry A1 558-B, Policy Planning Staff/Council, Subject Files, 1947-1962, Box 28. Obtained by
Brendan Chrzanowski.

https://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/208714

Summary:

State Department Policy Planning Director George Kennan outlines, in a document for the National
Security Council, the idea of a public committee, working closely with the US government, to sponsor
various emigre activities.

Credits:

This document was made possible with support from the MacArthur Foundation and the Blavatnik
Family Foundation.

Original Language:

English

Contents:

e Scan of Original Document
 

April 30, 1948 = _/ fe [Yo

THE PROBLEM Iz
The inauguration of organized political warfare. May +©
ANALYSIS
1. Political warfare is the logical application of .
Clausewitz's doctrine in time of peace. In broadest
definition, political warfare is the employment of all
the means at a nation's command, short of war, to achieve
its national objectives, --to-further—its-—infimence and
authority~and-—to-weaken those” or its adversaries, Such
operations are both overt and covert. They range from
such overt actions as political alliances, economic
| measures (as ERP), and "white" propaganda to such covert

Lf c operations as clandestine support of "friendly" foreign

elements, "black" psychological warfare and even encourage-

    
   
  
  
    
   
   
  
 

ment of underground resistance in hostile states.
2. The creation, success, and survival of the

British Empire has been due in part to the British ~ ‘&

understanding and application of the principles of fg ity Al
political warfare. Lenin so synthesized the teachings of : )
Marx and Clausewitz that the Kremlin's conduct eee \
warfare has become the most refined and effective of any — 4
in history. We have been handicapped however by. & , | 4 ‘
popular attachment to the concept of a basic difference 4 Ly
between peace and war, by a tendency to view war as a

sort of sporting contest outside of all political context, “~<
: op ott: A or a political cure-all, suet —

 

 

 

état? by a Weiuctanes to recognize the realities
of international relations--the perpetual raytha of

   

a
F

  
       

struggle, in and out of war, a i
 
 

[ the Policy Planning

the Structure
of State

Of this Government,

and how the Department :
Should ©Xercise .

direction and coordination.

     
 
   
  
 
     
       
     
   
     
     
    
   
    
 
      
 
    

7s There are

[ze listed below projects which have
been or

‘re now being Suggested by the Staff:

— es Liberation
Committees

“Sess Purpose: . To forn ‘centers of national hope and

 

 

 

Teviilve %®./sense of purpose among political refugees from
2 \ the Soviet World; to provide an inspiration for con-=
tinuing popular resistance within the countries of the
Soviet World; and to provide a potential nucleus for
all-out liberation movements in the event of war.
| Description: This is primarily an overt
if operation which, “— should receive covert guidance
= and possibly assistance from the Government. It is
proposed that trusted private American citizens be
encouraged to establish a public committee which would
give support and guidance in U.S. interests to national
i freedom movements publicly led by outstanding political
, refugees from the Soviet World, such as Mikolajezyk and

  

Nagy. The American Committee should be so selected and |
organized as to cooperate closely with this Government,
The functions of the American Committee should be
limited to enabling selected refugee leaders to keep

alive as public figures with access to printing presses

   

and microphones.

activities.

It should not engage in underground
Organized public support
yranny in foreign countries. Through-

suffer
ing under Oppression. (The Communists and

4ionists have exploited this tradition to the extreme,
to their Own ends and to our national detriment, as
witness the Abraham Lincoln brigade during the Spanish
Civil War and the current illegal Zionist activities.)
Our proposal is that this tradition be revived
specifically to further American national interests in
the presént crisis,

b. Underground Activities behind the Iron Curtain

Purpose: To maintain contact with, sustain,
and influence underground movements in the Soviet world
resisting Kremlin domination.

Description: In contrast to CIA operations,
involving the American Government directly with under-
ground activities, this project would follow a principle
which has been basic in British and Soviet poreeten

warfare: remote and deeply concealed official control
of clandestine operations so that governmental responsi-
bility cannot ba shown, In brief, the project, as
proposed by S/P, would operate as follows: general
direction and financial support would come from the
Government; guidance and funds would pass to a private

American organization or organizations (perhaps "business"

enterprises) composed of private citizens of the

 

 
 

; these organizations,
fices ;
establish Contact in Europe and Asia, would

wit

representatiy h the various national underground

intermedi i is a Countries and through these
arie

= Pass on assistance and guidance to the

resist
ance movements behind the iron curtain.
Cie S
eupport of Indigenous Anti-Communist Elements
in Threatened Countries of the Free World.

Purpose: To strengthen indigenous forces
C
ombatting communism in countries where Soviet political

 

warfare is a threat to our national security.
Description: This is a covert operation again

utilizing private intermediaries. To insure cover, the

private American organizations conducting the operation |

should be separate from the organizations mentioned in

‘previous projects. With governmental guidance and

financial support, their function would be along the

lines of those employed by us during Aue Italian elections. 4

This project is a matter of urgency because the communists

are reported to be planning the disruption of ERP through

 

labor disturbances in France. If the anti-communist
labor elements in France are not immediately given

assistance, ERP will be jeopardized.
8. It would seem that the time is now fully ripe

for the creation of a covert political warfare operations }
directorate within the Government. If we are to engage

in such operations, they must be Sader onitied direction.
One man must be boss. And he must, as those responsible
for the overt phases of political warfare, be answerable

to the Secretary of State, who directs the whole in

‘ . =
7 *
. r]
‘ as
« 7
’ +
ay
a 5
in 7
.

coordination,

  
FOP SER oT

~b—
9.

While Cov
ert po
Controlie Political Warfare must be

, d by the Department,
Physically in the Departmen

z
he more true When it is reali

the direction should not

t of State. This is

zed that the considerable
eration could not be

S budget, Therefore, this

sewhere,

funds necessary for such an op
Concealed in the Department!

operation mst find cover e1

to. The National Security Council Secretariat would

Seem to provide the best possible cover for such a
directorate, Such cover would also permit a direct
Chain of command from the Secretary of State and be
@ natural meeting ground for close collaboration with the
military establishment.

* RECOMMEN

 

11. There should promptly be estabiianed, under
the cover of the National Security Council Secretariat,
a Directorate of Political Warfare Operations.

12. The Director should be desigaated by the
Secretary of State and should be responsible to him,
. 13. The Director should have initially a staff
of 4% officers designated by the Department of State and
3 officers designated by the Secretary of National
Defense.
14. The Directorate should have complete authority

over covert political warfare operations conducted by

this Government, It should have the authority to initiate

new operations and to bring under its control or abolish

existing covert political warfare activities,

   
    
 
  
  
 
   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
   
-HOP-SEGREF

-7-

15. Specifically, (a) the 3 projects mentioned

in paragraph 7 above should be activated by the Directorate

and (b) covert Political warfare now under CIA and

 

theater Commanders abroad should be brought under
the authority of the Directorate,

16, The coordination of the above covert operations

with the overt conduct of foreign policy should, of
course, be accomplished through the offices of the

Secretary and Under Secretary of State.

 
