CUL4G40 999 . 2

PPROVED FOR SEonE 7 aw
EEE a March 2009 G E SECRET , oO. | (2)

LE 21 February

  

 

 

 

Ae
ea EO 12958 3. 2.300) (4)>25¥"

MEMORANDUM FOR HR. WISNER (C)

| SUBJECT | Notes on Discussion of New York Committee with
ire George, Kennan, ke 1949,

| le The following persqng*participated: Messrs. Kennan,
Wisner, Savage, Joyoe, Davids, Thompson and Barnes.. The dis=
oussion was: on the basis of OPC 's memorandum of February 17 and
attached Cooumnestt 6»

"2. Mr. Kennan began the disoussion by stating that he
agreed in prinoiple to all oontained in the memorandum of February
17. He said that he might wish later to suggest certain ohanges
in the ‘proposed "public announcement".

3. The urgent need for a similar clearance of the New York
Committee project by the Seoretary of ‘State himself was brought
| to Mr. Kennan's attention. It was pointed out to him that pros=-
aon pootive members of the Free Europe Committee, of its exeoutive |
) group, and of the Free Europe Foundation were of a oalibre to in» —
sist upon knowing that the projeot had been oleared by the
Seoretary of State and, therefore, that OPC oould not go further
in the matter until it was in a position to give an affirmative
reply to the query on the part of any key person as to whether
the projeos had the Seoretary's secret approval. It was also
urged with Mr. Kennan that time is an important factor; that
commitments are already being taken with respeot to headquarters
in New York and the inoorporation of both the Free Europe Com=- ~
mittee and the Free Europe Foundation. Mre Kennan agreed to all
that was said and at the close of the meeting called General:
. Carter to drrange for an early mesting between the iniienl
Mr. Kennan, Mr. Wisner and i Mr Joyoa.
- eee tire vee .

Ae On conolusion of disoussion of the suggestions recounted —
in Paragraph 3, Mr. Wisner mentioned other mtters outside the
| scope of the New York Committee whioh he felt should be laid be~
| fore the Seoretary personally by himself and Hr. Kennan. There .
- Was an agreement on this point.

Be The relationship of refuges political and intellectual
th the New York Committes, with the Politioal Divi=

Tong or the State Department, and with "ORC was discussed at
length. An a reoment, Was s reached a: as ag follows:

 
   
   

/ as With the establishnont ‘of the New York Comittee, SERIES “Bt
political desk ae and their re 94 19 in the 20 ae

OBC 2

 
    

 

 
LUL44EUI9S

‘e
na
‘
' °
g ‘ . b
3 : . . ;
~™® : + rm ‘ ‘ .- . I . . : ;
> a . . . . . . -, . . \
e * . ‘ . . :
: . “ » Be .

 

Net

5 ) : a
fo

 

 

    
  
   
  
  
 

m Dae . ot

 

Department would as rapidly and as effectively as

possible restrict their dealings with the refugee ,

political and intellectual leaders in the United States

to the collection of political information (1.0. ine oe 8

formational conversations and interpretive comment by . mg." ee
- ER's on political developments), and to normal satate~. ST 7,
menta of this Government's overt policies. Po

be Exiles and refugees would be referred to the New York =

Committee for all na reers Of Sn operes tous nature ». i NORE

Including the groviston of support and faciiities 3 ws

 ““efemsérvea and their activitiese af :
~“ stefan een racdestana tected cdhais go AUS E « ey SARA sera K Sa SR yd

 

fei

 

 

 

 

Oe - a
orn, i.
tear)
CAp2)
-

. .
‘
Ste Laat Ae Ret ent = pe A ae ere et sm

EO 12958 3.5

 

(c}

 
