c01441016,,,

 

SPCRET SECURITY INFORMATION

. Office Memorandum + UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

TO

FROM

SUBJECT:

  

 

Colonel Zierath

Outerbridge Horsey Slp ( pire Tyee)

AMCOM Radio Progran.

Two major problems seem to be involved in the AMCOM
radio program so far as Germany is concerned: problems
of radio sovereignty arising in connection with the
origination of non-German programs from German soil and
problems of policy arising in connection with the
propagation of controversial issues and others possibly
deviating from or conflicting with views held by the

host countrye

The first type of problemijwill be solved, once the
agreement between AMCOM and the Government of the Federal
Republic has been signed and ratifled. Pending such
action, AMCOM may be able to operate by derivative use
of the rights now exercised by the United States as an
occupying power and by the latter's explicit sufferance,

ATE DEPT. DECLASSIFICATIGN ha VIEW

FF.

wal

The second type of problems may become acute on a
case to case basis, once operations have gotten under
waye However, in order to reduce the conceivable margin
of friction, it might be advisable to olarify some of
the terms of reference and guidance points with appropriate
offices in HICOQG, and upon their sconscurrgsnce and views,
with the proper German authorities, befére arrangements
are finalized and the program is actually carried out,
This suggestion is made specifically in consideration of
the stated purpose of AMCOM and of some of the guidance
points, notably those listed under I A, B, 1, 2, 5, 6
and 7, It is conceivable that the Government of the
Federal Republic may wish to raise questions and possibly
seek to obtain assurances in return for permitting or
tolerating issuance of propaganda from German territory
which ostensibly advocates policies espoused by foreign
governments and foreign minorities, which addresses itself
to, and is designed to interfere with, internal conditions

in another sovereign country, G«68., the USSR, and which
by its intent and anticipated effects may be considered
by that country as a direct violation of established rules
of international conduct. ‘t appears most likely that
this contingency will arise in connection with the
"liberation" theme which, it is explained, calls for
"liberation from Soviet tyranny", "liberation from police

rule," etc. ,
Moreover

SECRET SECURITY INFORMATION

(17)

Nd

DATE: February 11, 1953

cree ae, ss =.

cise as shown

YOO).

X(

etain Class’n G Change to

ik

J Declassify in part and ex

AD 12558,

; AMD eclssify After

 

 

CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO CDECLASSIFICATION AND/ORC |

 

RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENTC MARCH 20090)

 

“4

 

Ct Ae

 

APW ith concurrence

Jioblaine

wa has

Pues

f
"nN A

lafias

toe

eee
iat .
27S Vv

 
CO1441016

 

 

SECRET SECURITY INFORMATION
ow BD uw»

Moreover there seems to be little ground to believe
that the policy laid down for Radice Liberation would long
survive the reestablishment of German sovereignty.

Concerning individual points in the memorandum the
following suggestions are made;

le Point 8 - "Acknowledgment of Past Mistakes in
Polioy and Strategy" ~ might well be eliminated, It
is next to impossible to treat this-csubject with plausibility and effectiveness, and it would probably only
confuse the listeners. Imphasis should rather be on
present policies, such as that followed by Western
Powers in Koreae

L_Se Page 1, point, 1, line 8 "the present Soviet
regime" might be used in place of "their",

USe Page 5, point 9, line "and on the Free World"
to be added after "material on the USSR", |

EUR s EE: TDillonzdar

 

 

 
