ene ee,

 

AL DOCUMENTS FIL

 

f

c01434009

©
L

iI i

~

met LFS se le eps. ae

 

. . . KADIO ~ (p, QL.
Youur D (rg) JAN 22 1953
ee ; te dad

1. The Anerigan Genaittee for the Liveration of the Peoples of “fi
Ryasia, Ine. vill aponsor redic broadcasts veawed to Soviet ccsupation

personnel and to the peoples in the UBER proper, enabling the representatives of these peoples in the non-communist vorld to speak to
their counterparts under Soviet contro] in terms dented offielal
Smerican radio activities. The Coordinating Center of Anti-Bolshevik
Servasle, qualified to assume leadership of the exiled peoples oF the

against their leaders, is now organised and in the process of
broadening its representation of the emigration from the Soviet Union.
The Coordinating Center in whose name broadcasts will be made, is 4

 

genuine creation of the Russian and Nationalities emigration. The

functions of the American Committee are (1) to assist the Soviet
refugees to create an ever more effective organization of leadership,

es it has been doing, and (2) to make,.qvailable to them the means,

radio faciiities and the like, with which they can communicate with |
their fellow countrymen behind the Iron Curtain. cs

2. gio Liberation, sponsored by the parents Committee, is an
organ of the peoples from the USSR, as represen ‘by a grouping of
Soviet refugees who have associated themselves to assist in the
struggle of their fallow countrymen against Soviet oppression. Its
voice will be solely that of the total Rusaian and Nationalities
emigration, so that it may achieve credibility and aecomplish maximum
results, United States direction and the advancement of United States
aims will be attained subtly and without compromising the essentially
indigenous character of the programs. There will be no duplication of
or competition with the broadcasts of VOA.

3. Although the broadcasts supported by the American Committee
are not to be American broadcasts, they will, in fact, be serving the
interasts and objeotives of both the Gevernment of the United States
and the anti-Soviet emigration. These interests and objectives are
similar but not identical, The general objectives of the United
States Government in supporting Radio Liberation are:

ee”

[oa ee ne ee —
j

 

 

]
|
oe dae eh aaa aE erence it a |

|
a. i. —

i

 

 

do. To deter Soviet aggression by exploiting weak spots in
the Soviet armor

e. To atimate internal disaffection, which can be turned
to United States advantage in case of wer

ad, To modify the Soviet attitude toward the non-Soviet world
in the direction of greater co-operation.

EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 08-Feb-2011

 
  

“€01434009

The aime of the anti-Soviet Russian and Wationalities emigration,
whose members are staffing Radio Liberation, and who, under American
supervision, are responsible for the programming, are simpler and
more specifics

a. To overthrow the Soviet regime
b. To establish a new regime (or regimes) which will reflect
their political and ethnics concepts.

5 oy a
i ete oh a ee a
TR mee ae a ay eee a

It is recognized that this divergence of aims between sponsors and
emigres will inevitably produce differences of opinion regarding the
content of programs and the treatment cf themes, This guidance is
being formulated to meet thia situation and will be put into effect
when accepted by the emigres themselves.

i RT ee ae Sek
RE ea tnip oes,

Te ee es
a

k, Radio Liberation will be a guest on German territory. In
consideration of Western Gerwany as a sovereign host country, the \
radio will make every effort not to prejudice German security, or :
indirectly, American interests therein. It will not foster alarmist :
Or threatening views of the inevitability and imminence of general
war; it will not make direct appeals for defection, and it will not

incite the peoples behind the [Iron Curtain to a violent overthrow of
the Soviet Government.

5. The broadcasts will be directed in the beginning primarily to
the Soviet armed forces and the Soviet civilian personnel in the oceupied sones of Germany, Austria, and the satellite countries. A Soviet
citizen will riek his liberty and possibly hia life in liatening to
these broadcasts, and the contents must be such as to justify his
taking this risk. So that the programs may attain their definite
objectives and every idea serve a definite purpose, a distillate of the
best available thinking on such programming forms Attachment "A", from
which direct program guidance will be extracted. Attachment "B" lists
those whose careful consideration and thought form Attachment "A".

\
\
!
{
i
t
t
|
i

 
\

* Se re ee

ATTACHMENT "A"

I. PROGRAM GUIDANCE

With regard to the contents of the broadcasts, the following
represents the considerations of the most knowledgable individuals
available, including recent Soviet defectors.

A. CENTRAL THENE
1. Liberation

In order to give the emigre radio a positive idea,
around which the diverse elements in the emigration will rally, and
which will win and hold the allegiance of the target audience and
which will justify the riske listeners will run, it is proposed to
build this station's programs around the central thame of Liberation.
Not only is piberee toy the pronounced policy of the newly electe
Republican administration of the United States Government vis a vie
the Soviet Union, but it also constitutes the ultimate goal of both
the non-Boviet world and of the disaffected peoples of the USSR
wherever they reside. As a theme, Liberation permits a richness of
variation ~ Liberation from Soviet tyranny, Liberation from police
rule, Liberation from hunger and fear, Iiberation from regimentation
and the like. It is positive in seeking amelioration of a specific |;
evil or group of evile, yet it does not constitute a direet challenge |
to the regime nor automatically inspire listeners to make useless
sacrifices,

B. DOMINANT THEMES
| 1. Disaffection

2a. One of the keys to the attainment of United States
policy objectives toward the USSR is the diseffection of the Soviet
peoples for their regime. This disaffection stems from the intrinsic
evila of the Soviet syatem itself and constitutes the weakest link in
the Communist Party's chain of control. Pronerly atimiated and exploited, it will influence the Soviet attitude in the direction of greater cooperation
with the outside world, and it will deter Soviet aggression. In short,
vy increasing the disaffection of the Soviet people for the Soviet
Government, we are increasing the prospeots for a lasting peace on
terms more favorable to the West. Should war break out, nonetheless,
the West's advantage will be largely measured by the temper of the
peoples comprising the USSR.

 

 

\

 

 
 

c01434009

i

 

b. The approaches to Disaffection, as a theme, are, of
necessity, indirect. They are, however, virtually limitless in
number, kind, and substance. Indeed, any theme considered appropriate for Soviet consumption can serve to further widen the breach
between the rulers and the ruled.

 

7

 

 

|
2, ' ' . _..

{

 

 

ican ey

3. Boonomy

a. Beconomic themes offer a ready field for propaganda
activities against the US8R. The Soviet Governsent has helped to
Create and maintain the keen interest of its subjects in economic
affairs oy repeatedly stressing its achievements in the material vell-~
being of the Boviet peoples, particularly in comparison with the lot
of capitalist slaves. These claims are often held suspect by the
peoples of the USSR who can see in their own material condition the
difference vetween Soviet myth and reality. These same people, either
on the basis of personal experience or the expertence of individuals
close to them, are also avare of the disparities between Zoviet claims
and the true living conditions of the Western World.

 

bo. In developing economic themes for Soviet consumption,
it is essential to safeguard the listenera' pride in themselves and
in their country. Therefore, in making material comparison between
the Bast and the West, Redio [iberation will manifeat recognition of
the inherent wealth of the Soviet on and pay tribute to the genius
of its people, and blame their economic plight on the sinister purposes
of the ruling circle.
 

 

C0O1434009

Recognizing that Russians, by their nature, have always
delighted in theoretica] discussions, that the present generation of
Boviet citisens has been raised on an idvological diet, which,
because of its many contradictions, constitutes a weak point in
Soviet aruor, Radio Liberation will give prime emphasis to the development of suitable ological themes. The history of the soviet
yegime is a baleful record of the steady sbandonment of lofty humanitarien goals and constant modifications of ideology to meet these
shifts. The target audience has lived through most of these ideological sig-sage and will react to their exposure much more feelingly
than a western audience. They reach to the heart of Soviet ideological contre] and should be exploited to the maximum. Furthermore,
tdeology is the basis of whatever faith the Soviet military man may
have and in its inherent weaknesses offers a vulnerable point for
attack.

5. War/Peace

. Stirred by their own propaganda purporting aggressive
capitalist encirclement of the USSR, the Soviet peoples are intensely
interested in the proppects of war and peace. Unquestionadly there
exists in the Soviet Union a hard core of thoroughly disenchanted
peoples who would welcome war as an avenue of liberation. The majority
of citizens in the USSR, hovever, are still shaken by the last conflagration and view the possibility of future hostilities with alarna.
Redio Eupereticn will take a positive stend on the subject of war and
peace, sta simply and truthfully the reasons for the rearming of
the West and the necessity for protecting the non-Soviet World's
system from Bolshevist control. The radio will Judiciously show that
the West's potential for victory is considerably greater than that of

the Soviet Union's, chiefly because the latter is unable to rally the
full hearted support of its oppressed and heroic subjects for the enSlavezent of humanity in general. The Soviet peace offensive will be
expoged in terms which the Soviet mentality can understand, and
evaluate. ‘

6. Freedom Campaign

Radio Liberation will emphasize a constant and clear
delineation between the peoples of the UBSE and their oppressors.
Similar distinctions will be made between Soviet leadership and such
groups as the Red Irmy, the workers, the peasants, the intelligentsia,
and even the security police and the rank and file of the Communist
party. These distinctions will be pointed up by the development of

 
 

01434009

themes appropriate to a given strata of Boviet society. The radio
will emphasize the seope of the freedom campaign in the West and the
existing opportunity for the freedom loving peoples of the Soviet
Union to join the campaign, either through defection or by certain
positive measures of resistance to the regime in the USER proper.

T. nt retatti of thi st

a. In interpreting the West to the peoples of the US&R,
Radio Liberation must take particular pains to preserve its integrity
as an gre operation expressing exclusively the emigration's point
of view. It follows that this point of view is not always in harmony
with Western thought and policy. The radio should, in the main,
allude only to those differences between the emigration and the West
vis a vis the Soviet Union, which were attributable to the West's
past lack of knowledge of the Soviet scensa, which do not reflect
unfavorably on the West's attitude towards the peoples of the USSR
and which are now happily resolved,

b. To avoid antagonisms inherent in implications of the
West's better climate for living, interpretations of the West will
atress that, but for the Soviet regime, the peoples of the USSR, with
their potential wealth, their native talent, and their spirit of
freedom, could live as well or batter than their Western brethren.

8, knoviedgment of Past takes in Policy and Strate

Although this theme is perhaps properly a part of inter
prea of the West, it is of sufficient importance to stand alone.
h treating mistakes of the West, Radio Liberation will take the stand
that the West, always sympathetic to the peoples inhabiting the present
territory of the USSR, was in the past rather naive vis a vis the
Soviet system. The West's intentions were good but its ignorance of
the real purposes of the Soviet Government led to mistakes which vere
detrimental to its own well being as vel) aa to that of the peoples in
the UBER. This prior ignorance should be understandable to the Soviet
peoples who themselves were originally mis-led by the Bolsheviks.

Hedto kibermtion will make a | explanation of
forsed repatriation of former Boviet citizens following World War

IX in the light that the West migread the heroic struggle of the Soviet
peoples ageinst Hitler as a sign of their support for the Btalin regime,
that the West was lulled by war-time Soviet relaxations of internal
contrele into thinking that the Soviet Government was prepared to grant
ite peoples real liberty (a hope equally shared by many doviet peoples
themselves) and that in its fervent desire to cooperde with ita var~
time allies, the West failed to recognize the fate awaiting those to

be repatriated.

 

 
 

 

1434009

9. Interpretation of the USSR

Radio Liberation will base its interpretation of the USSR on
the acknowLedgnen of the historic and valiant struggle of her peoples,
whatever their ethnic background, political orientation, or social
level, for freedom and equality. This struggle ia now directed
against the Bolsheviks who used the hard-won freedoms of the February
1917 Revolution to seize power and reorganize the country On even more
absolute totalitarian lines. Comparisona will be drawn between the
Free World and the USER emphasizing the differences in relationships
between government and peoples These differences will be bolstered by
concrete examples close to the experience of each listener. The
material on the USBR, vill be accurate in every detail.

10. Attacks on Personalities and System

There is much evidence to indicate that many Soviet citizens
hold Stalin in great esteen, feeling that his aims are good but that
injustices result from faulty implementation by minor and corrupt
officials. Stalin, therefore, will be criticized subtly and by
innuendo. For example, if Stalin takes credit for the accomplishments
of the Soviet World, why is he not responsible for its short-comings?
What was lenin's opinion of Stalin? What is Stalin's record? The
brunt of the attack will be directed against the Soviet systez itself
as maintained by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Communist
Party mambers, however, will be given an alternative to perishing
with Sovietism.

11. Internal Tensions of the Soviet

a. There are three general types of grievances causing the
internal tensions of the Soviet Union:

1. Those common to the usjority of Soviet citizens, e.g.
police terror.

2. Those peculiar to certain groups of Soviets and with
which most other groups can sympathize, e.g. eollectivization.

which a asubstantial share of the population is in
direct disngreement, e.g. nationalisn.

3- Those peculiar to certain groups of Soviets but with ? '

ob. Redio Liberation will accentuate the grievances mentioned
in 1 and 2 above, Terety compounding the tensions between the
peoples and the regime, and will, wherever possible, avold discussion
of the grievances in sub-paragraph 3 which would have the effect of
drawing millions of Soviet subjects closer to the Soviet Government,

-§ 
 
 

CO1434009

12. Nationalism and the Political Future of the USSR

a. These sre the issues on which it has been most difficult
to reach agreement among the euigre groups. The question of nationalisnz
widens the cleavage between the Great Russians and the ethnic minorities,
while the problem of the pelitioal future of the USER fractionalizes
the emigration into as many parts as there are groups. The Coordinati
Center, es now constituted, became a reality because the Russian and
Nationalities groups were able to shelve their differences on these
two highly controversial subjects and adopt the principle of selfdetermination, after the over-throw of the Soviet regime throughout
the territory of the USSR, as a compromise measure.

b. Were Radio ea @ puppet of American interests, it
would regain mute on natio am and the political future of the US&R.
Being the mouthpiece of the emigration, however, discussions of these
subjects can hardly be avoided. To assure against presenting them in
explosive forms and to maintain the appearanse of unanimity in the
emigration, all programs, whether in Russian or in minority languages,
will discuss these subjects only in the light of ethnic and political
self-determination by the peoples inhabiting the territory of the
Soviet Union when conditions are such as to permit them freely to express their will. <Any other course is certain to alienate or antagonize
& major share of the listening audience and will promptly be exploited
by Soviet propaganda.

 
 

C01434009

II. 6 FOR OPERAPING PERSONNE

A. MRCBANICS ,
1. Omission of Jdentification Signals

Such signals indicate to the Soviets that we are initiating
broadcasting, and allow them quickly to narrow jamming on our wave
length; they also may give the listener away. Signals thus lose
their primary purpose of indicating to the audience the source of the q
program. The listener soon comes to recognize the voice of the
announcer, making signals unnecessary. Although a recognizable voice
also places the listener in some danger, it is still less dangerous
to him than identifiable signala. It is, in addition, an importent
encouragement psychologically.

ec. COatasion of Recognixable Music Themes

fhe same restrictions apply to musical themes as to identification signals, Their use would make listening even more insecure.

3. Length of Prograns and Itens

The length of the initial programs will be limited to onehalf hour of original script in Russian and ten minutes of original
soript in each nationality language represented in the KTAB. The iteus
will be short and self-sufficient, i.e., able to convey a message to an
audience with limited time to listen.

kk. Music

Music is generally useless for the short propaganda programs envisaged, The music which the Soviete broadcast is equally as
good or better than any which we could produce at this station. Uniess
it serves a direct propaganda purpose ite use will be limited to background for certain dramatic features or for transition.

5- Proportion of Neva and Features

News is of first consideration in programming. The peoples
of the Soviet Union ere vitally interested in hearing the truth and in
learning of events sbout whieh they hear nothing but which affects then
personally. Straight news, neve analysis, and news commentary will
occupy some 70 percent of total broadwast time, leaving the remainder to
features, By presenting certain news items which the Soviet liatener
Gan easily verify, his confidence is gained, and it lends credence to
Other news items.

 
 

C01434009

 

Programs will be rebroadcast continuously during the day.
Mevs broadcasts will contain 10-20 per cent straight news items with
the remainder commentary and analysis, Neve broadcasts vill be interspersed with feature programs, but repeated more often than features.
Best schedule of broadcast seems to ba 6:00 - 7:00 a.m., 2145 - 6:00
pem., 9:00 ~ 11:30 p.m., local time.

7. of News:

 

News will be concerned with major world events which can
be shown to have s real and definite interest to our target audience.
Regional news items will be stressed if they tangibly can be shown
to affect the present or future of our target audience. "Hot News"
ig good on occasions, but not so important as to an audience which
has continual and almost immediate access to news events as they
occur. Soviet news vill be refuted at the very earliest moment if
blantently untrue. The truth is of utmost importance in straight
nevs items, which must be positive, not refutory and not dependent
upon Soviet news items. They must be timely, however, in following
Goviet emphasis in newscasting even though the initiative remains
with our station.

8. Information Denied Soviets

Such information will be supplied to our station, but
will not be broadcast braggingly in terms of the democratic world,
or in scattered sequence with no seeming purpose in mind,

9. Type and C sition of Features

Features will be dynamic and positive in their approach,
and refutory only in rare instances. The voice of the announcers, as
well, will be strong, authoritative, knowing. The features will enpioy material with which the audience is at least partially familiar;
Boviet history, reversaia in Soviet policy and the Comsunist line;
references to forced lnbor camps, purges; state controls over peasants
and workers, and over science and the arts; are important composites.
The questions to be left in the soldier's mind areal “Why am I here?
Why are my living conditions and those of the people at home so poor?
Where {s our personal liberty?” Program material nust sake him think
and lead him to seek additional information. Timeliness is a most
important consideration.

 

 

 

 
C01434003

B, BO’s and PON 'Ts
1. Be Clear

Enunciate carefully, speak slowly, use simple words and
sentences. In presenting ideas, be sure they are comprehensible to
the intended audience. Explain facts.

2, Be Repetitive

Concentrate on a few basic important themes and exploit
their every facet.

3. Be Interesting

Vary illustrations, arguments, style. Use humor, irony
and the like, but stay within basic themes. Use human interest
stories, first person narratives, eye witness accounts. Use drama
in all ite forms. Personalize your commentators.

4, Be Time

Catch listeners' interest in an event at the time when
that interest is st its peak. Know the day to day out-pourings of
Soviet domestic propaganda,

5. Be Truthful

Truth is one of the great strengths of anti-Soviet propaganda. Know in accurate detail what you are talking about, particularly
where the audience is in a position to verify your propaganda. Temper
truth with discretion. ‘

6. Select Your Pacts

Play the news that supports your case. Select supporting
fasts from history. Select carefully the arguments or frames of
reference in which your case appeara strongest. Avoid faets and
arguments that might offend your audience.

 

7. Know Your listeners Group By Group

You can then tie-up propaganda with listeners’ personal
interests and lives and appeal to their strongest motivations.

 
CO01434009

 

 

8, Give Impression of Absolute Conviction

Every facet of broadcasting, from the voice of the speaker
to the words he speaks, should impart an air of salf-confidence and
estrength. Present an idea as if ite truth is self-evident and
universally accepted.

9. ve Impreseion of Absolute Objectivit

   

In this connection the radio will have to acknowledge
those accomplishmente of the Eoviet Union which are irrefutable.
These acknowledgments, however, should be qualified by pointing out
the facts behind Soviet accomplishments, Objectivity dees not imply
neutrality.

10. Bliminate Any Impression of Antagonism

Identify the speaker with the audience. Avoid impressions
that the speaker is "different", critical, boastful, condescending,
and the like. Within limits cater to audience prejudice.

11. Build Self-esateen of the Audience

show appreciation for national culture, native talents,
peoples’ accomplishments. Avoid appearance of flattery.

 

15. Do Not Discuss Viaseov and the Vilassov Movement
16. Po Not Use Threats

-~ 10 
 
