 

C05459047

  
 

CATT as i”
cor’ ¢ Ci a (9)
Pr .

x
S May 29, 1962

Subjects Comments on Proposed Basio Policy Guidance Paper for the Russian
Language Radio of the American Committees. ot

 

I have three major canments on this paper. First, I think it contains
too many categorical imperatives. The injunctions against discussing the
nationality question, the political aims or aspirations of anigre groups,
or the future geographical or political frame work of the USSR are, in ny
opinion, too sweeping. It is unrealistic to attempt to confine radio operations of this kind within too rigid limitations. It 1s| readily conceivable
that situations may arise when it may be topical and desirable to discuss
one or another of these subjects and when fallure to do go will seriously
impair the effeobiveness of the operation. Basic guidance should seek to
sketch the frenework within which programs may be forsuleted and the broad |
policy objectives which it is hoped to attain rather than attempt to eliminate
certain subjects from any possible consideration.

Second, the guidance fails to provide a central positive thane around
which the station oa build ite programs. It states that the broadeasts are
to serve the interests of the Russian liberation movement, but wishes to

avoid the question of detaroying or violently overthrowing the Sovieb Govern~
ment, as well as ideological thenee. News and features are all very well,
but unless they are geared to a central idea which is firmly implanted in
the minds of the programming staff, it is diffieult to see how the broadcasts
can win and hold the allegiance of the target audience and justify the risks
whieh the paper recognises listeners will rune I advance no suggestion as to
what the cenbral theme should be, but I wish to enter a strong plea for the
desirability of having one.

Third, I have the impression that the paper loses sight of the fact that
the station is to present a Russian viewpoint, operate in the name of a.
Russian sponser, and present programs written and produced by Russians. If it
Tz to be convincing, if it is to achieve its purpose, it must have a Ru asian
approach and a Russian flavors I doubt thet thig can be accomplished. under the
present directive, and I would suggest that before it 4s crystallised in final
form it be discussed with the senier Russians om the radio staff in Germany
in order that a paper may be evolved which incorporates their ideas and which
| ‘will oommand their approval and support.

, In addition to these general considerations I have the following coments
on details in the papers

1) Paragraph 3 of the general guidance providds thst the radio "will direot
the brunt of ibe attack against the Bolshevik party rather than the
Soviet government as such or its specific representatives." This 1s an

unrealistic distinction and will be oonsidred by Russians on both sides of the
Iron Curtain. Everyone lmowa that in spite of the academic delineation
whieh the Soviets make, Government and Party are in fact so. intertwined
as to be indistinguishable,.partioularly when responsi bility for action
is sonserned. It is difficult te see what oan be gained by enforoing
such a distinction by a non-official station, and the programe risk

pe re ott rt

acquiring a reputation for naivetee. CIAHAS NO OBJECTION TOL! DECLASSIFICATION
AND/ORC RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT:
16-Feb-2011

 

 

 

 

 
C05459047
a ‘wo Bowe

2) Paragraph 9 of the program guidance (pe8) (Type and Composition of |
Features) statess "Program material must make him (the soldier) think
and lead him to disones what he has heard with his comrades." Making the
Soviet soldier think is certainly a valid objective. Whether wo should
seek to induce him to disouss issues raised in the broadoasts with his
comrades is more dubious. Defector testimony is unanimous on the presence
of informers and provocateurs in the ranks and the grave risk involved in
discussing political questions with anyones Only rarely have instances
been mentioned when sugh disoussiong oocurred, and then only with obseryanoe of elaborate sourity precautions. I question whether the programs
should suggest any course which might expose ligteners to betrayal and
punishment.

3) Paragraph 10 (p.2) states that "Ideological themes are to be avoided « »
"It ie difficult for me to imagine how programs prepared by hussians
for a Soviet audience can possibly avoid ideological themes if they are
to oarry any punoh, and I feel strongly that it |would be a mistake for
them to de 80. We must always keep in mind that |the present generation.
in the Soest Union has been- raised on an ideological diet and that Russians
delight in ideolegical discussions. Furthernore, ideology is the basis
of whatever faith the Soviet soldier may have, and since that ideology
js full of contradictions, it is a weak point in his armours We deprive
ourselves of a telling weapon if we exclude kdeological discussions from
our programse

4) ~~» Paragraph 12 (p.3) (Freedom Campaign) indicates) that, "at the proper ,
atage", the station will discuss the encouragement of defections I am not
clear what is meant by the phrase “at the proper stage". It would seem
to mé that the proper stage ia now and every day, and that the encourage=
ment of defection should be a constant and major theme. .

5) Paragraph 16 (p-4) (Attacks on Stalin: Politburo) states that the Soviet
| peoples associate Stalin with all the evils they have suffered. The
acouracy of this statement 1s dubious. There 1s much evidence, to indicate
that resentment 16 strongest against officials on the lower levels and
that Stalin is held in great esteem by many Soviet oitisens, who feel
his aims are good but that injustices result from faulty implementation
by minor and corrupt offinials. fhis statement and the conclusions drawn

from 4t should therefore perhaps be reconsidered.

The same paragraph directs that the communist system in general should
not be abtacked since the entire population participates ‘$a ity This is
like saying forced labor camps should be condoned because 15,000,000

Russians are confined in thems It is specious reasoning. Certainjy the
system is our major target, and if it ia not to be attacked, why Bre we
going on the air? |

6) Paragraph 17 (Analysis: Disaffeoti on) states that there should be fow
theoretical analyses of past Soviet actions, but that the facts will be
allowed to apeak for thanselyes. I doubt the effectiveness of this approath. The Soviet public is not ageustomed to facts which speak for
shamselvese It is accustomed to being told what facta meane Our audience
will sontinue to be subjected to the Soviet interpretation of the neaning
of many of the same facts which we will give theme If we are to. gain their
confidence and win adherents, we must expose the flaws in the Soviet in=

 
C05459047

whe

terpretation and present a more convincing one of our OWN.

7) Paragraph 21 (peG) (Additional don'ts) requires that the East-West,
twowcamp approach be avoided where possibles I fail to understand the
reagoning behind this directive or to see how, given the present state |
of the world, it is to be implemented. And if the programmers succeed —
‘4n avoiding this approach, what are they expected to substitute for it?

 
