CO1434007

am

 

 

 

  

3 April 1952

APPROVED FOR Eq!
DATE: 08-Feb-2011

 
 

        

   

 

       

\

ard . . ~ cf

7 42
.

me rn eas ‘on as , Marsh oes 8 a habs, Avens,. Ceaieel tay’ the Iminigra| I. tae Subcommittes ond Snel: Divestor of the Internal Seeurity Subcom-.
. Be, mites of the Jemate Jud 7. Committee (013 three headéd by Senator
ch) Oe MeCarren). togatior with Me-epelsten, My. Prask Schrpeder, made
o* aveileble to me ‘sheik Vigwi regarding the Netioual Commiitee for
i Free curope, Theis intstal Comments were exiremely hostile to
NOP h, indi@etiog that theve weve many Mazaiote la the group, sad —
that they were Walling out left wing and seciallet propaganda. Mr. _
Avene stated that thate weve severe) witnesses prepared to testify | 77
before the Cemmilttes that the entire operation is "voties endihat
1 te tinameed' by CLA. In fagh, I was indicated te me thatthe fact
oo that CIA ls financing NCFR is commos goesip emong many alien /
oo groupe in New York.

 

- ok, 2. At thie meeting Mr. Arenas expreesed considerable (cel 1 \ ng regarding the nurnber of private bille being introduced for NC) re
employees. He pointed out that most of these foreigners entered
this cuuntry om lemporery viene aud thet many eere thea converted
a ta permanent residents by private bills. He. stated that’ ff 11 was. not.
a Goverament organisation timanced by CIA or State, there seeingd
ot b> be no reason te give these aliens preferential ireatment, and that
me they should rely on normal quotes for admission. I punted out to
sop him thet CLA was not eponsoring these bille and that he might address —_
) Sf uny questions he hed om that subject lo Admiral Miller, the responf \ aiple head A NCKA, Furthermore, | suggeeted that, im view of the
) ' nature of the work of NCVE sad ite components -- Crasade for
i ¥reedum and Radio Free Eurepe, rather then air bie charges, by
should diseuse the whole mattey wilh Admiral Miller, whom be. would
. find extremely sympathetic. | offerad my services to bring him and
the Admiral together as [ had known the Admiral four eeveral years.

5. I finally secured on admiseion from Mr, Arens thal dante afly the programe of NCFE and ita components were extremely .
valuable, were making s fine contributiun to the cold wer, andahould
probebly be cantinued, but that there were certain reservations which
they had regarding the * ppevation. , io

  

-EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs: ~. a a 7 EMIS, g
EO 13526 3.5(c) | BS a age yt se

   
CO1434007

; \e 3 . ,
. ve a | . Cy i
2 _ “! , . A | a, # e ; } /

4, I subsequently discussed this meeting with Mr. Dulles
and .dmiral Miller and rege nded thai 1 be permitted to arrange
e meeting between ihe Comabaitiee otaff ead Admiral Miller, and
this was approved.

S$. Ow 2d April Admival Miller met with Mesers. Arens aad
ochroeder and discussed the probleme outlined above. It can be
steted thal the entire meeting wae held in am atmosphere of extrame
cordiality aad cooperation.

b. Mr, Arens commenced with a brief statement of certain
of his views, a0 indicated above, and Admiral Miller outlined some
of the background ef NCFE. Mr. Arens thun asked how it was
financed, aad he was informed that it was financed ia part by public
subscription, im pert by fowndations, and that certain covert sepecis
were covered occasionally by Gevernment funds. (When Mr. Arens
left the meeting | etressed to him the fact that he should nel mention any Geverament aopects of NCFL, and he said he would wi,
but that ws should not "kid" eurselves thal many people did aot
realine that CIA particularly had a financial interest im the operation).

 

ro 7. The eccond point in which interest wae expressed was the
vod. manner of clearing Committee employees. Admiral Miller explained
a that the Committee’s employees were cheched beth in the United
States aad abroad threugh the facilities of the FBI, C1A, BBC, CIC,
and every other available means. Mr. Arene pointed out that it wae
alwaye possible for a sleeper te slip into on organization, bul was
asoured that if any euch case developed the employee would be

ousted immediately.

sewer ce, See me

8. The next poisat raised was s report which the Senate Com mites nad that several former Sate Department employees who had
left the Ospartment under a loyalty or security cloud hed secured
employment with NCFE. Admiral Miller premised o complete study

of thie point.

| 9. Considerable discussion then teovk place regarding

_— | who heads the National Council lor , ddr.
vchroeder read extracts from several reports in his posseseion concerning and his verellability. It was poluted out that

| [boseted that through « Stele Department connective he

 

 
 

“€01434007

 

 

could comtrel the viens reece by | teat be controlled
certain people op the ‘dock tal Jend in RVE. The
Committee alee had vestimeny thes haps three sete of
books -- ome fer the, = (“ass Crome, ome for NCW, and ome
to whieh only he and hie ederetery had access. B was alleged
that he alee thonw around the name of CLA rather loosely.
10, Me. Arsene veised the caseoh i wheee

eatry inte the United Staten was allegedly epensored by NCFL.

11 wae pointed owt that wile wes alleged le be s Communist
agent and that! — Ranself hed an ensevery reputation.

Ll, My, Gehveedery fudicated that he wished te intreduce
Admiral Miller to certain poeple im New York whe were hnowledge able on NCFE problems, end Admiral Miller urged that there de
farther talks bebween them.

 

Walter i... Plorsheimer
Legislative Counsel

 

 
