c01441011

r '

SEDRET @
SECURITY INFORMATION

_ EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs (C) 25 marek 1968

MEMOAAMLOM FOR THE BRCORD

SURGE:  Sumamty of Genelusions Resnhed ob 14 Marah L053 Newbing
in Offie0 of Mrs G, B. Bohlen on Qiestions Raised ty
Adniyei Alan %, Kisk

 

Waiweyth
an
|

The nesting wae ealied at tha request of Aduirad Kirk, who
wished to digeues & fem quewticns conserning the American Counithes

fer the Liberation of the Peoples of Russian, The fullewing ecnslusions
were resehads

1. Genbimaing efforts te add to the menbarakip of the Comittes
percons of prominenns wild be intensified,

phaeds will be laid on adding
cosh sutatiinhed wealth os to insvende She plaasinlity of the

Committee's engaging in ite sextenplated psyehologion] warfare
aetivition.

 

Be Mitre tubion undertook to sxpedite the eustemyy souri by

elearense on these persens, by weiving noses) seaurtty provsdures
afher 0 routine name chest’ tas rovenind nothing eafereesbas,

Rs ‘The Genndthes will intbiase prejesha the value of whish fron
& research etandseieh should enable it to obtain grants fren one w
newe Founlewens (Garvangie, Reckefelley, ebe.). To the extent thad
Foundation funds are tims obtained, added plausibility will] be given
to Committee operations fren 6 finaneial aapeod.

S- A third eource of funds, for the Commitbes's aokiviticn
Will te develeped through the Grumde for Preston, This Grusede sow

ie)

ro nepT oreT ax TATION RRYV 4
VER 6 29-24°8 : StOHET LTE DEPT. DECLASSIFICATION REVIEW
: mers ae Class nisCnangeto

BOX 5 PODER. f/f fm: tec las Suy 1 part and excise as shown
; * Raye OSM EZ + f
; Bek

 

ss —————— CT
c01441011
SEGHET
SECURITY INFORMATION

Pinanees pany | ‘ou 4vi ti pa

|

   

  

Suveye Wo peliay objestica
wig Geen bo tho DYOMAES'S Elio Finanoing Miniyal Kisk's Comstvtes,
lar, Behlen stated thas he approved sush use of the funds redeed by
the Cyusade,

Qe Mr Dulles streseed the need for axatining wisther the
Crussde ean now contvlbuke te the Geenittes, fren the funds
veised by 4% in the 198 canpaign. That cenpaign way have bean
ge sandueted that cantrthaters night resent Grasede funds going
ue the American Gonai thee,

be Th was agreed that in any event, the Crusade sheuld ammounse
ae eon be possible that i= has desided te seceyps funds far the
Aworiven Cenntttes, Arrangments will be made with Crusade
offieinla te selisit funds during Ge 1982 ounpaign in euch 8
why 84 te endWe 1% to turn over a portion of these funds to
4 With regard te the nsed of explaining the Cemittes’s prinsi~

branches of the Government, it wis agreed that Adnival lig ean tod
should regard queh explanation as one af hie more importants tasks,

6. There was general agreqaent that Admive) Etyk should go
Cledy te Who neatlagn with Pacoion ond eeetmackon cmigrode Ws
for or suppertera of thee exigres. Mr. Styvens vireseed that ibe

 

 

ie
 

CO1441011 Log
oo SECRET

SECURITY INFORMATION

 

 

whan. it is
es soon as possible under & ayonserahip that is transyayently thin.
Po

RE~S/HVP/mn |
Distri bution:
2 = Mr. Joyce
1 ~ o/EE
2 8+
1- BB

nies

 
