€01441010 ,

 

 

EMR

APPROVED FOR RELEASE‘ | |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

March 2009 i
—SECUREFY INFORM AH ON- MAR 14 Woz

[|] EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs (C)

MEMORANDUM FOR we Rabdert F, Piansing frat

SUSMEOT 3 een are ri Senisy and

1. There ia enelosed herewith a memorandua covering
® regent’ conversation bowen of my staff and
iy. Foy Kohler.
2. Mr, Kohler stated he would not prepare any

memovandum of his neeting with, | — jamd requested that we

sexd you | neneranduma on the conversation.

Attachment: As noted

ans /aVE/meY

10 March 1952

Distribution:

2 = Addressee

2- SD)" |

l= BE:

Utis
¥U 2317 / tS ‘7 Z f= ny
Sf | re + Mo K¢ i} V
( 20)

“Se

—
CO1441010

 

SECRET

semmrreminor (|,

 

 

® March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: File

fo
SUBJLOT : Conversation with sda itonier of VOA on 6 March 1952

a

a)
1. Messrs. [ee Onwae
Kohler of the VOA at ll o'clock on 6 March 1952 to determine the ability

and willingness of VYOA to help: with the current problem of the

| radio.

Qe ‘reviewed briefly the negotiations leading to
the formation of a political center of the projected radio operation.

Mr. Kohlicr was swar of the background of both projects and had approved
them in principle,

3. Ir, Kohler mide it very clear he considered the formation
of the political center of primary importance, and personnel wh> composed the center the key to the sentir: problem, He exyeressed concérn
lest the radio project take precedence over the center itself and be- !
come another case of the tail wagging the dog. With the center a
going concern, the values of radio and the press increase,
made it clear that our conception of the entire operation places the
ultimate value on the sponsorship of the radio programs and the
Russian character of the programs. Mr. Kohler azreed that the key to
the success of the operation was the effectiveness of the delivery
and content in terms of Russians speakines to tussians., Anything of
a different niture would become a bad iinitation of VOA without the
resources (VOA's ability to process three to four million words a
day). lir. Kohler returned often to his belief that broadcasting is a
means often confused as an end, -The limiting factor of our operation
is the appeal to itussian people from Russian people, ‘The radio is an
instrument only, ci'pable of being easily glamourized,

46 Recognizing the importance of program and personnel,

| __ jasked the benefit of VOA's ideas ond experience to avoid the mis
takes of RFE Mr, Kohler was not optimistic about personnel,
and thought the mistakes of|  |inevitable in our type of operation.
He, however, agreed to cooperate with us and to give us access to their
research and programing men, ne expressed his concern sibout defection
as an object, thinking its effectiveness limited and its inadvisability
great unless epecifically ordered.

5. ir, Kohler felt the other sorivcus limiting factor to be
the technical -— the neressity of chosing tarvets for small specific
ands, and the need for competent tachnical acvisers, ile initially
‘stated th t+ there was nofrequency availa>le in Europe, for example,

~ SEGRE

 
-€01441010 tk

SECURITY INTOR MATER

that would successfully reach the U.5.S5.R. He expressed pessimism

on the availability of radio receivers, mentioning that RCA's production of fregable receivers has not materialized, leaving them with
an unspent Congressional $300,000,000, He felt it impossible to reach
the 0,.5,5.R., but admitted the possibility of effectiveness in the
peripheral areas. He spoke at some length of point-to-point reception,
mentioning VOA'S current broadcast 20 minutes an hour, 16 hours a day
in Morse code on 2 commercial wave length. ‘the comercial wave
lengths are outside of the jammed beans, are directional, and so far
the U.S.S.R. has made no attempt to jam point-to-point receivers, He
suspects the reason for the latter is the Soviet's own vulnerability
to similar jamming, ie., telephone, domestic broadcasts, telegraphic
relays. Mr. Kohler also spoke of the VOA ship as being no answer to
the problem of reaching U.S.S.R., but merely providing a mobile basis
forutilizing tho funds investtgated,lest a land base be suddenly lost
to us.

6. | made it clear that our project™radto operation in no way competes with the operations of the VOA,but is planned
as an adjunct a5 paralled operation \ those of VOA. Mr. Kohler
admitted that the differences between sovernmental and private broadcastin;; in this field are constantly being diminished, lle spoke of
VOA's own plans in Munici which inelude an initial operation of. 50
programing hours in 10 languages and ultimately in 16 languages,
reachin: all out central Asia. raised the problem of the
small pool of available manpover for sucn operations and the possibility of competition between us and VOA in contracting with them,
fe suggested the possibility of joint use of some of the emigre personnel, but Hr, Kohler forsaw no real troubls on this score, It was
agreed informally to avoid pirating, to stay clear of any individual

the other organization had apnroached, and to discuss any specific
case on an ad hoc basis heuween Mr. Kohler's and offices,

7. (In tnis connection lir. Konver spoke of the firm azreement YOA has pe “= which he would like to duplicate with us, and
mentioned Mr. attempt to lure Barmine away from VOA,. =

| jecomnitted himself immediately to the agreement embodying the
three points above, and forsaw further advantages in mutual use of
| personnel when agreeable to himself and Mr. Kohler. We, for example,
! can smploy such people as recent defectors who are of limited use to
VOA.

8. Mr, Kohler warned against setting up too close an
association, stressing gucti "normal" relationships as VOA enjoys
with the radio industry as being most desira:le. The availability
of VOA's information to Admiral Kirk and his availability to them
was wonfirmed.

 

 
C01441010 so

1
oo . ' = none ak: Wl ge & BERR mB

v
€

 

9. In closing | | repeated that the basic principles
which underlie the formation of a political center of em.gre organizetions were set out on 2 paper by Francis Stevens of the State Department, whicn had been seen by Hr. Konler, The formation of the center
has been held up by our refusal to ‘ork with only the Great Russians
cnd our desire to include the minorities as well, The project has
been delayed for over a year in the atbéempt to bring the minorities

in on an eqiial basis, and although a wide area of disegkmimaieigh still
exists, thanks to the extremists (NIS and the Ukrainians), its reality
is close. Mr. Stevens has been informed at svery stage, as have
Messrs. Barber and “oyee. iir. Kohler asked that all developments be
relayed to Joyce with the request to pass the information on to Tom
Divine.

LO, Mr. Kohler agreed to let | | know ee of
any proselyting brought to nis attention, He agreed to allow |
iz complete access to VOA's information and personnel, and suggested
Oo come to New York for several days as a representative of
the Psycholoyrical Strategy Board making a survey and talking with the
key people in VOA's organization. It was specifically stressed we
wish (1) YOA's audience analyses and estimates, (2) a knowledge of
the sor. tLearinutive people in the technical and programing fields,
(3) information on the best use of hours and facilities, and (4)
whatever suggestions and information ¢sn be plucked from their best
pkans. tir. Kohler sugsssted that the PSB'’s paper on psycholorical

themcs ani targets on the Soviet Union be surveyed before |__|
visit and that PSB aend a chit for his visit to eventuate next week,

 
