 

 

€01441009 ~
APP ROVED FOR RELEASE | | (2)

March 2009. | SECRET

“1 EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs (C) 22 Gesenber 1581 flr?

 

MEMORANDI FOR: 9/Bims
SUBIECT ¢ BEe¢ Mewsing with Geaerge Kennén on Thuveday, 20 Deo 62

   

 

 

1 tee etre tte ot tasten, as 4) clay ates Lae
| A981, Th was thelr purposes to sound oat Br. Kenia ca the

radio partiaularly ad te the iine aud ebreng se wbineks «
‘Bovdet nutherktt eas ,

   

nit Lt 3 pis. , tesa
the vies ths that ihe poitsienl cuter w Is uly ereatix
=n) ks SY BAVNSTLGR OF !

 

 

 

 

 

 

c¢ )

 

 

 

 

CONFIDENTIAL

*

EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs

 
€01441009

e 1
a ye
- ‘ ‘ i ‘ . ‘ ;

will be uo thenge in Soviet eutherity, asd thet we wi 21 have te gontt ms
we do rusiuagy atth Abe Poibtoures Vakted States government, if not
si pint eeter, mah avalon aan an she Senge a eres 7

 

Sets Ff
reel Ey
ai
{oe
Eig
gel
EER
al
eae ig
f
et
=

 

1%. Oay npaoanel eee
Congteltcent ito ree tn ta theis one
apperteantty for free eheles in Goverzaent,

& Ge suggested that we. de not lusp the Soviet Anny and the rink
Buk Side HE ‘Sire Campenleh Party Ral gyen Sie: eens ty palipd Sh Bethet
Leadevehip.

9. The Soviet Te nt amy conapiracy agaings the o outalde
world and ita em citisens but againes ite om wuremeragy whieh 14 cone
trols ty scselerating or slowing down its rete at dagronvateg senpie senpoti tens
As ® aensequetien, wmexine tension existe in these branches

authority direatly below the Politbres

0, Mrs set forth twe guiding prineiples fer the o
of the padher (1) 20 muet coneider ita rela as a quest on Serna
cevvitoary @entain ite attack ao ag not to a hirreeecres Rargting ;
and indirectly Ameriean interests therein, and (8 is chould re Me f
quemtion of destroying the Bovdes Governmante Lente 9g} and

feel eed preheat ee ee

 

: | fake that Point 1 would make 5 to seubare of the
sagiamapamenduisiproecieie Sf sas

AGEN. Pb

IRs Ae the 4: oe target of radio is
| the fice turned to apprepeiase then % .

SRR YRUGE LAt tara a
doaeriptions ef dufeqtar Fe and treatment in th iw ad be.
We should inorease clesatisfaetion with Avny tisetpiio and wit ee cued we
etriet eonfingnent of officers and soldies on cseupation du ie
should tell them why they are restrained from travel and fare an bonteste.

18. We sheuld alas attack their politioal indoetrinnelen as intel<
legtual sulweraion ond atrene the fast that the Soviet regine olesed the
window on Buvope ani the workd co deliberately and pain rere REY opened
byte the Greats cur propaguada 1¢ but striving to kne

Bes

 

 

 
C01441009

 

   

ies Wye Teman tune Wat the Siviet pewshe sve inmeniady inbapnsted bt
 muiturel aetivity and pews, and that we should give then perindie jp“?

an, Ae wyle of presedta tions | lit. Kennan wiveontee « digsied
foreeful ereokel “. Saepeninkian ant _ au ihe Se *
at Rueeian Bad gress. ef the ty 7 ty f

18, On dhe whole, he advouates « Large wensere af Key

the politionl Senter fadle within the frasmwark af & fo sinple roles
laid down by use

17. Tho meeting adjourned fey luneh at approximately 1108 ; Dems ond
waa not contlemed,

   

a

 

 
