CO1441006

” &

¢


APPROVED FOR RELEASE |
|

|

e 4

 

Aa

 

MARCH 2009 |

 

_ EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs © (C) .
EO 12958 3.5(c) _ 6 September 1951

 

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT : Development of Russian Political Center

PARTICIPANTS: Messrs. Bohlen, Mathews, Reinhardt and Joyce
from Department of State

General Smith and Messrs, Dulles, Wisner, |

[.t~S |from CIA

 

1. A conference was held in the office of Sine Director, CIA,
28 August 1951 at 23:15 pem. to discuss a memorafidum, dated 27 August
1951, prepared by representatives of CIA concerning the Development
of a Russian Political Center. .

2e Mr. Wisner explained that the development of a Russian
political center had been undertaken by CIA at the request of the De~
partment of State and that considerable progress had been achieved
toward the establishment of such a center, representatives of five
Great Russian groups having recently signed an agreement to collabo~

‘rate in a political center known as the Council for the Liberation

of the Peoples of Russia. Mr. Wisner reviewed the recommendations
of the subject memorandum concerning the use to which the Political
Center should be put and the activities in which it should engage,
These includes

a. Radio programs beamed at the Soviet Union

be. A newspaper

Ce Political activities of the Center

d. Research Institute in Germany.

3e The Director inquired

py) of 1)

/

- a eadianemememamniidad -—- aw 1+
|C01441006 Ly

|

 

 

,

|

\
\,

 

3, The Director inquired as to the cost of such a program which
| | said had been estimated at| pointed
out, however, that he considered this estimate excessive and believed

that it could be substantially reduced. He explained that the cost
of establishing broadcasting facilities constitutes by far the largest
item of cost. The Director asked whether the Russian Political Center
ould be given over the facilities of Radio Free Europes
explained that this proposal had been considered, but that
from a technical point. of view the location of the present transmitters
of Radio Free Europe, which are in Germany, is not satisfactory for
broadcasts to Soviet Russia, He believed that the cost of expanding
RFE facilities to include broadcasts to Russia on any substantial
scale would at least approximate the cost of establishing separate
facilities expressly for the Russian center, The State Department
representative confirmed that from a policy point of view it was not
desirable to have broadcasts to Russia under the apparent auspices
of NCFEes

he The Director then questioned the effectiveness of radio pro=
paganda beamed at Russia, stating that in his opinion propaganda would
have Little practical effect in the Soviet heartland and indicating
his opinion. that propaganda was chiefly valuable if directed at the
periphery and Satallite areas, The Director solicited the views of
the State Department representatives on this point. It was the gene
eral consensus of opinion on the part of the State Department -repre~ --—
sentatives that the practical impact of radio propaganda on Great
Russia was problematical. Mr. Bohlen said that although radio pro~
paganda would not incite the Russian people to active opposition, it
might, nevertheless, create doubts in the Kremlin as to the loyalty
of its people in time of crisis, and thereby act as a determinant to
further Soviet agression. Mr, Dulles stressed the desirability of
concentrating propaganda on Russian occupation personnel in Kast Germany.

5. There was. some doubt on the part of all the State Department
representatives as to whether it was reasonable to expect the groups
forming the Political Center to continue to work together with any —
cohesion. Mr. Mathews expressed considerable concern on this score.
He suggested that it would be highly desirable to have a trial period
during which the Political Center could engage in limited activities
to test the ability of the constituent groups to work together, Mr.
Reinhardt suggested that the priority of activities to be undertaken
by the Political Center be altered to make radio broadcasts the last
priority .e

6, In view of the cost of the program as originally envisaged,
of the doubt concerning the value of radio propaganda directed at

Soviet Russia,

   
c01441006 .

 

x

Soviet. Russia, and the uncertainty concerning the ability of the Political Center to remain unified, it was agreed that the following
“activities on the part of the Political Center should be initially

suppor teds
a a. .Publication and distribution of a newspaper repre~
senting the views of the Center.
~~ be. Maintenance of the Research Institute now established
in Germany.

Ce Radio broadcasting on an experimental scale using
ae the facilities of Radio Free Europe (to the extent that
use of these facilities is feasible and does not interfere
unduly with existing commitments of RFE) augmented by such
limited additional equipment, including a mobile ten kilowatt transmitter already available, which can be procured
at a reasonable cost,

7». In conclusion Mr. Wisner requested guidance from the State
Department on the following points:'

& Appraisal of the value and effect of wroudeaste
to the Soviet heartland,
- oe b. The nature and extent of the control of all
propaganda issued by the Political Center and how this
control should be exercised,

Ce Programs and type of activity to be developed
by the Political Center.

8. Mr. Mathews stated that on receipt of a memorandum out»

lining the proposed program the State Department would undertake to
comment on these three points.

a
Di Org Copies § & 7 were destroyed and

3
DD/P - 1,2 copies } & 5 were sent to |Joyce
DDCI = 3 for distribution to other State
Mr, Frederick Reinhardt ~— officials. Suggestion of DD/P

y Mr. Robert P. Joyce - a y

Mr. H. Freeman Mathews Mr. Charles E. Bohlen oS alized

BP sttic

   

 

cme eee
