wee a ova , . EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs
a APPROVED FOR RELEASED |

DATE: 08-Feb-2011 . , | 4)
Oe secret @ august 1992

— EO 13526 3.5(c)

 

 

Devglopmen’ of Ruseien Dols teal Genter

! i, Im the sumer of 1950, the Deparinent of State through
lire George Kennan, gts develope of reliMen eter tucert te

 

the Department of State between vepfesentatives of State ato OPO, the
original concept of the operation wes deaided upon, and OFO recel ved
State Department approval and guidance to proesed the
preojest. One further major conference was held by i, with

iw. Kennan at Prisgeton on 17 Ostober 1990, Sines that tise, continuing
guidance on important matters has been received fron the Beparteent,
mninly through Nesare, Joyce and Reinhardt.

2» the project aa originally outlined had two major aspects:

a. The establishment of a cever somittes in New York
which would aot ag the optenslble souree ef funds and guidance.

be The organisation of a political center in Germany.

3. OGertain geneval principles as to the organisation of the
committee had been dedided upon at the meetings with Mr. Xennan during
the sumer. The most taportant of these weres 5

Qs That the center would be one of the peoples of Russia,
inaluding beth Greet Russian and non-ireat Russian emigres.

De That as soon as the politiaal canter was optablisbed, .
it would undertake certain concrete activities. a

| o. That our main interest in the prejegt was reaching the |
| people still within the Soviet Union and that our main interest a
inakdes Te ee 7 MADE Shem Ae. 9 vehicle fow_ reaching the peaple

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lnsides | _
the thet originally an attempt should be made to get four
seleeted Great Russian groupe tegether and that efter this we

done, certain nonm-Great Russian nationality groups, ether Great
Russian groups, and nen-party individuals should be brought in.
The four Great Russian groupes were to ber

a : 1) WTA.
° : &) ssc
3) Melgwapy Group
h) New York Leagus

yO gad
ice: AC Cr

BBS eh he oes fo | “ ay Vike Poe.
sa G Sa ER
1 ec lS ht ‘ OW sien: ete

L¢

 
we wm) Uso

he  Gertain generel prinsiples wore also desided won in velation
to the establiahsent of the cover comelttes in New Yorks

ae That it should be a sxall conai ttes
Be That during the early stages of tis projenty
publicity should be avoided. Is unas recognised that
sone point in the futare publicity wuld be necessary and
deal publ e.

Ge The Gone ites shenia in general be compened of
prominent people who had a known interest or concern in
iRuseian affaires .

d- ‘That all the members ef the comaittes should be
“eut<in" to the fact that this was « Government project.

e. That the comelttes should be strictly a “front
and that at the outset thie should be made very clear te
then oo that there would be no alouideratanding at a later
dates

fo That the ced. ties would not publialy selicit

Se Zain January the organisational meeting of the oomai ttee
took plaes at the River Gliub in New York attended by lire Wisner and
several other OPO representatives, and the following oomeitioe meabers: |

} Millian Be ChesberLin
Alles Grover

Willian ie thite
Wises Y. Fidos

Following thia meeting, the comittes was incorporated under the laws of
the State of Delaware as a nonprofit organization, with offices ih Nev
Yor Giiy, and was sened “The Americm Comittee for the Liberation of

the Peopies of Russia, Ing." Following this, offiee apace was rented in
Mew York and an office set up inder the direction of Reginald Tounsend as

  

Kaseutive Direster. At the p % tine, the office is eacupied by s anal)
, ee) aby which is earsying ea voutine aaron the Comal. ttes, ooverely
\e a a “4 Washington covertly einphacord i ee tnd — resen tati ves Eurepe.
eS Since ita organisation, “have been’ aided ts the Cseaad. ttees
Foymar ‘Ydieon of New Jarsay end Ieaaa Don Levine, At the

Governnr
present tine, a Foundation ds being established in the Midwest to act as one

of the cetensible funds for the Cocina Vos

cory 2 tt tne
Sdn Gaduiiammminet

 
 

6, Upon the arrival of the original prineipal agent in Gersny in

the fall of 1990, negotiations took with the four leading Russian
a eruse in an coteapt to get agreamenh for the eatabligiuent of @ palitical

qenter. In January at Fuegsen, Davaria, a seeting of these four groupe

: e The meeting was wnsutcesaful because of fai lure to reach an
agreement’ on tao basic isaues:
Be

| The eduission of uon-Ureat Russian nationalities to the
political center on « bakis of equal ity.

The Goundttes took the position:

a. That the non-Grest Russian nationality groups whieh
accepted the basio progren ef the political center must be
adwitted on the basis of equality.

Be seetdad’ ty busdediatouminantna ad’ cast a thee on te
should be dest rey agree ire

Te Da Apri 19%, 10 was desided thet a new Ruropeen Representétive
_of the Com those. seine a9 our prinoipel saeat in (ermeny, Was neegssery.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

senbers fron each 70 proteeol will form the baaie of the polities
center. The five \ aeepkad te o > points whieh the Comalttee insisted
be

 

give out further datalls © the Auerican Press.

MB CRET oe

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

8. During the last few nontha, planing has been progeeding and
certain action hes been taken in regard to the “prastical work" which
7) the political eenter will undertakes which is of course the real. puxpose
\ >», -\ of the whole projest. The najor eleventa in this “practical work" are the
We \ followings

OF } « Radio programs beamed at the Soviet Union
a ee aS De A er er” a
. atl de

G@. Politiqal activities of the Canter
y d. Researah Institute in Germany

~ 7 ze Last spring, the New York cover ttee tock over support of
hy Monae usrian Regsareh Institate in Muntehs has since that tine bees

    
   

/ etvengthening and expanding its sativities. This Institute will now beacons
part of the polities) emter. In : going

 

 

 

 

 

 

+ = _ , eee

a =i

a 20» the largest and most difficult proven ie that of establishing the
(predic tnahls tes and Progaming necersary fer or large-scale brvadeasts ta; the
Sevlet Union. A study has been prepared for us by A. D. Ring & Co. covering
the baslo teshuical factors involwd in shortwave broadcasting to the Soviet
Anion and outlining the preferable areas for the location of radio truns- ,
- witters. |

 

 

 

 

 

| ha Deen Sree Fe oe we Sane OC She cametaee Ss mae! puen
a the teahnical, business and aduinistrative aide of the radio program. He
i oe bas “ited thed ® preliminary plan for the radio projeet. —

| ii. Sow that the agreement has. been reached to form the polition] center
| and the prelisinasy planning and collection of information has been ccmpleted,
| vw certain bagic decisions must be aade in regard to the redlo projecte

ed o 1950, the sacinm budent of soprecimataty
mS ry must be approved. Thig is a maximus

ae ron apes way eae Pla tsa det Te
fil RS |

 

 

 

‘se

be Fixe and final approval of the Department of State and

ae an GIA muat be given to the establishment of radio tranaitters to be
at 5 uged by the political aentex for broadeaste te the Soviet Uniune.

co A dgaiaion must be made ss to where to locate the trans~mitters and the Department of Stade's approval and aasiotance must
be granted to the Committes to enable it to approach the Goverment
in

that} area.

CT Raa,

 
   

a, A working ayrangeemit fer oes etohange of information
and experionce mast be axtablished with VOA.

 

 

 

 

 

 

nant sell wf COE? ate 4
Re Pe Joyae
Fo He Matthews ec hfobe “A od lene
Foner byl
cen! anh
| , <—3o—>

ode Cha ond cr ‘a

 
