C05459037

wv

ee

=

EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs SEGRET

CONF IDENTIAL|

(7s)
Ue

SEGRET

: él Gre

(9)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

28 August 1083
— APPROVED FOR RELEASED.
MEMORANDUM FORs op
qhiad is — DATE: 16-Feb-2011
SUBIRGT » [ Radio Aims and Objectives
i, The main objestive of the! jatte progran will be

to yeash the peoples of the Boviet t Unden a & pregren of Ruseians
apeaking to Russians, not the 0.8. Ger & pening to the
asainns ond other nationalities of the Borie’ Enion. It is felt
that through gush programs we oan “gee serous” the vitslly taportant
idea that there ia 2 Evussian alternative to the present regines

   

3. In general {hese progress wii ctrgxh the follewing points
oy attempt to lay the basic foundation for thems

a. A strong friemdship exists on tha part of the dverican
and other peoples of the free world fon the peoples of Russin,

bo A Russian alternative to the present regime ia possible.

@. Amerion end ite allies wish to age the peoples of
Russia free and Hying under a demacratio Peete

de The Oounsil fer the Liberation of | ) Poot ples of Russia
espouses dencevetio yule in Russias with pasie ghanges 551

(2) Breakeup of sollestive farna;

(&) Some privete cumerahip; ,
(8) Froeden of religion, speaeh, prena,\ ete.

@. The patriotian of the various pecples of Aussi mgs
be bullt up ae a fores againet the Govier, Tense

fo She different vati owl ties wiih be tnfiuencad ts von

oentrate theiy hatred against the regine eng not aghinst eaoh
other.

Ls

ge The Russian people will be influenced to Lsoretee theiy
Will to reaist the regine, |

he It will be shown that refugaes fran the Soviet Union are

 

 

 

fy
C05459037
.

oo SECRET

wellehreated, respeeted an4 given an important and aotive role
in the anti o® struggles

4> Te wil} be shom thathe peoples of the Soviet Union
that the U,§, and ite allies are the real foves for paane
in the world and heave no intention of destroying or onslaving
the Ruselan peoples

j» Soviets antions and propagends will be exposed,

ke Ge 8. and aliled poliay to the peoples of Russia will
be explained.

3e| (ss pando whl) brosdeast in the nme of the pecples
of Ruspiae Dy having Russians sypegking to Busaians through an
ccfoon tn nate up of the peoples of Russia, we will achieve an
shat ean never be atenined by “foreign” operated Seenluss ies
yoprépenting the offieia) voice of the Ush. Sever: |
cing Gplepatia relations with the foriet Union,
vedio vill te eluate peek teeaky see Saree rly direstly to the

   

   
  
  

 

 

peeples of J to

to individuale . |
|

fe

Le

 

 

 

4. These broadsante will nots

a, Attempt to cause revolution the possi bi M ties in thia
direetion must be resegnized as a Weapon in ne for suoh
time as U.8, poliey may change, as in het war.

bo Speak fer 9 “gevernrent-iurexile™;

Oo Ofigially commit ‘the Usbs to any particular polioy.
in regard te 6 govermentel, palitical, esonanie strueture
of any fuwre free goverment or governnentsa in the areas
bounded hy the devies Union;

de Baek any partieular refugee or exile group.

 

nn

l-Addressee
2-8D
BEET
