}CO1441005 a, gst .

q

, oo
¥v *; . , , ||
_ — “SECRET Re
{ ’ { ¥

_EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs
| EO 12958 3.5(c)

.
ie

| APPROVED FOR RELEASEC March
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS) 2009

SUBJ ECT: History of Project > |

le In the summer of 1950, the Department of State through
Mr. George Kenna who was then Counsellor of the Department,
requested CIA/OPC to undertake the development of a political
center amongst the emigres from the Soviet Union. It was felt
to be tremendously important to organize a center which could
speak to the Russians in the name of Russians. Ata number of
! conferences during August 1950 at the Department of “tate between
! representatives of State and OPC, the original concept of the
operation was decided upon, and OPC received State Department
approval and guidance to proceed to eee nth ir One
further major conference was held by with Mr. Kennan
at Princeton on 17 October 1950. Sin imé, continuing

guidance on important mat. ived from the Vepartment,
mainly through Messrs. _

2. The project as originally outlined had two major

 

  

 

 

 

aspects:

Ae The establishment of a cover committee in New York
which would act as the ostensible source of funds and euidance.

b. The organization of a political center in Germany.

3. Certain general principles as to the organization of the
committee had been decided upon at the meetings with Mr. Kennan
during the summer. The most important of these were:

a. That the center would be one of the peoples of

Russia, including both Great Russian and non—Great Russian
emigres.

bo. That as soonas the political center was established,
it would undertake certain concrete activities.

ce That our main interest in the project was reaching the
people still within the Soviet Union and that our main interest
in emigres was in using them as a vehicle for reaching the people

inside. However, an important though secondary interest was to
organize the emigration. .

ds That originally an attempt should be made to get four
selected Great Russian groups together and that after this was

MOR

  
 

C01441005 ,
done, certain non-Great Russian nationality groups, other

Great Russian groups, and non-party individuals should be
brought in. The four Great Russian groups were to be*

(1) NTS

(2) SBONR

(3) Melgunov group
(h) New York League

he Certain general principles were also decided upon in
relation to the establishment of the cover committee in New York:

ae That it should be a small committee.

- be That during the early stages of this project,
publicity should be avoided. It was recognized that at
some point in the future publicity would be necessary and
desirable.

Ce The Committee should in general be composed of
prominent people who had a known interest or concern in
Russian affairs.

d.- That allfthe members of the committee should be
Nout-in'" to the fagt that this was a Government project.

ee That the committee should be strictly a "front"
and that at the outset this should be made very clear to

them so that there would be no misunderstanding at a later
date e

f, That the committee would not publicly solicit
funds.

5. In January 1951, the organizational meeting of the
committee took place at the River Club in New York attended by

iy. disner and several other OPC representatives, and the following
conmittee members?

Eugene Lyons

Willian H. Chamberlin
Allen “rover

Willian L. White
William Y. Fliot

Following this meeting, the committee was incorporated under the
laws of the State of Uelaware as a non=profit organization, with
offices in New York City, and was named "The American Committee for
the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia, Inc." Following this,

2

rip a
C01441005

wy
”
« ® e
F ’ ; ‘
‘]
? . —re —
, . R

office space was rented in New York and an office set up under

the direction of Reginald Townsend as Executive Director. At

the present time, the office is occupied by a small staff which

is carrying on the routine business of the Committee, covertly
with Washington and overtly with the Committee's representatives

in Furopee Since its organization, two new members have been
added to the Committees Former Govemor Charles Edison of

New Jersey and Isaac Don Mevine. At the present time, a Foundation
is being established in the Midwest to act as one of the ostensible
funds for the Committee.

6. arrival of the
in Germany in the fall of 1950, negotiations
ook place with the four leading nussian groups in an attempt

to get agreement for the establishment of a political center.
In January at Fuessen, Dbavaria, a meeting of these four groups
took place. The meeting was unsuccessful because of failure to
reach an agreement on two basic issues:

Be The admission of non—Great Russian nationalities
to the political center on a basis of equality.

be. The failure to agree on the handling of the
difficult question of the future government in ltussia
following the downfall of the present regime...

The Committee took the position:

ae That the non-Ureat Russian nationality groups which
accepted the basic progran of the political center must be
admitted on the basis of equality.

be That the issue of the future government for Kussia
should be decided by selfdetermination at such a time as the
people could freely express their will.

Tollowing: the break-up of the conference, negotiations proceeded with
the four main groups individually.

7. In April 1951, it was decided that a new FI
tive of the Committee
was selected

NECeSSAarye |

for this task and he proceeded immediately to Yermany to make a survey.
!ollowing a rapid survey involving individual discussions with the
various groups and certain minority groups, he returned to the U.S. and
reported to use It was agreed that( should return to Germany
as the permanent Furopean Representative of the Committee fof at least
a year~and-a-half and that as quickly as possible another attempt should
be made to reach an agreement among the four Ureat Russian parties.

  
 
 
 
“€01441005

“

= .
i ‘
SEGRET—_

| returned to Europe in early July and continued his

 

individual negotiations with each of these four groups and with
certain non-Great Russian minority groups. From 17 to 20 August
1951, a second meeting took place in Uermany. (As a result of

the split in the New York League, the number of Great Russian
groups had grown from to 5, the new group being the Russian
Peoples Movement (Narodniki).) These five groups met in Stuttgart
over last weekend, and on 20 August reached an agreement on a
protocol which was signed by two members from each group. The
protocol will form the basis of the political center. The five
parties accepted the two points which the Committee insisted on at
Fuussen. At a press conference in Frankfurt on 21 August, m
announcement was made of this agreements The political center
will be known as the Council for the Liberation of the Peoples of
Russia. A press conference is being held in New York on 22 August
by Mr. Lyons, fFresident of the Committee, to give out further
details to the American press.

8. During the last few months, plannihg has been proceeding
and certain action has been taken in regard to the "practical work"
which the political center will undertake, which is of course tae
real purpose of the whole project. The major elements in this
"practical work" are the following:

a» Radio programs beamed at the Soviet Uhion —
b. ~ A newspaper ~ BT

Ce Political activities of the Center

d. Research Institute in Germany

9. Last spring, the New York | |

 

an as since that tim
TEES punening and expanding its activities.

—eEE In addition to this, planning
as Deen going forward for the other activities. Under the direction

e

oo actual work on the establishment of the newspaper will

get under way almost immediately. A Russian editor for the paper has
already been selected. The five Vreat Kussian parties have established
an organization bureau to which non-Ureat Russian nationality representa
tives will soon be added which will direct the various rs ne
political center from the Russian side, in cooperation with :
and other representatives of the New York cover committee.

10. The largest and most difficult problem is that of establishing
the radio facilities and programming necessary for large-scale broad
casts to the Soviet Union. A study has been prepared for us by
covering the basic technical factors involved in
shortwave broadcasting to the Soviet Union and outlini

2 ining the preferable
areas for the location of radio transmitters. | ee

former Huropean Director of Hadio Free Furope, has been hired by us

_SECHET

 

ws
CO1441005

a

in thé name of the Committee to undertake the development of
the technical business and administrative side of the radio
program. He has submitted a preliminary plan for the radio
project. .

11. Now that the agreement has been reached to form the
political center and the preliminary planning and collection of
information has been completed, certain basic decisions must be
made in regard to the radio project:

 

ae During the FY 1952, the maximum budget of
approximately must be approved.

 

| bob. Firm and final approval of the Department of
“tate and CIA must be given to the establishment of
radio transmitters to be used by the political center
for broadcasts to the Soviet Union.

ce A decision must be made as to where to locate
the transmitters and the Department of “tate!s approval
and assistance must be granted to the Committee to enable
it to approach the Vovernment in that area.

d. A working arrangement for the exchange of
information and experience must be cstablished with VOA.. .

FRANK G. WISNER

21 Aug 51 Assistant Mrector for
PR-4s:JFR:jga rolicy Coordination
Distribution:
1 - DD/P
2 — FE-l
2 = SD/RE
oS.
