CO1385012 | , ) —SEeCREF

ce ena aici ri

wasp

DECLASSIFIED UNDER AUTHORITY OF THE
INTERAGENCY SECURITY CLASSIFICATION APPEALS PANEL,
E.O. 13526, SECTION 5.3(b)(3)

ISCAP APPEAL NO. 2013-098, document no. 1
DECLASSIFICATION DATE: September 19, 2016

 

WAN? 463

 

 

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International @rganisations Division

SUBJECT: Reflections on Radio Free Europe's Present Position
and Potential; Lines for Poland, otc.

1. This memorandum is submitted pursuant to my oral commitment
to give you an outline of certain of my current reflections on one of
the most difficult problems confronting our information policy with
regard to the Satellites -~ and more especially the line or lines
which can most effectively be taken toward Poland by Radio Free Europe
in the present situation. A certain amomt of this thinking is not
hew and other portions of it may be over-bold (via., those portions
dealing with the complicated and explosive question of frontiers: and
negotiations between the Poles and the Germans), In any case, it
should be gone over with a fine~tooth comb by the appropriate persons
in the DD/P organization as well as by State, USIA, and the Radio Free
Rurope people before all or the bulk of. this approach should be
plumped for. At the same time, I do not overly apologise for some
of the ideas, since they seem to me to provide a little terra firma in
the middle of a large marshy area in the idea field.

2. I, of course, start with the premise that we are seeking,
with regard to Poland, to avoid provocation to further violent action |
of the sort which would invite, and almost certainly provoke the Soviet
authorities to take retaliatory and repressive actions. against the
Polish people which would be no less bloody than those actions taken
and measures applied in Hungary. At the same tims, Radio Free Europe,
the Volce of America, and the other Western volces. of the air cannot
afford.to appear to "elimb dow" or dry up entirely -= 1t would be a
ridiculous and most regrettable.abandonment of the battlefield at a
time when the enemy's ranks are broken for us to pack up our voices
or mute them over-muck. In all of my thinking I find myself much

closer to the appreciation of the stat as given in Edmund Taylor's | _

artlele in the December 27 issue of the REPORTER, entitled "The Lessons

of Hungary," and as further reflected in the Roseoe Drummond colwm of 2

December 25, entitled "Hungarian Patriot Tells His Story" -= than to
any intelligence appreclations which were available in our Agency as
of the time of my departure due to illness. (If you have not read these

pieces, you should by all means do so and you should also read ‘the 4

Barrett MeGurn series of articles on Yugoslavia, from all of which it
emerges ever more clearly that the Soviet Government and the Communist

 

Ob/P A-FF bof

ce ee ts ae
C01385012

 

system generally are completely on the defensive, not only throughout
the Satellites, but within the Soviet Union itself.) This igs the way
the evidence added up to me while I was on my trip and this is one of
the main messages which I sought to bring back to Washington and get
acceptance for on the part of our authorities who are responsible for

policy planning and formulation, as well as the operational echelons,

both governmental and non-governmental,

| 3, «Another point which should be registered at the outset is
that the events of the past two months have proved up to the hilt ~

- and then some —~ the enormous influence and impact of Radio Free

Europe behind the Iron Curtain. Friends and foes alike have rushed

‘forward with their testimony and with their pleas, and the evidence

is both incemtrovertible and overwhelming that we have forged here

one of the most trenchant weapons in the free world's cold war

arsenal. (It was practically with bated breath that PRIMOZIC begged
me to do what I could to the end that Radio Free Europe. should not
embark upon "provocative emanations" concerming Poland; just to men~
tion a single example.) I am naturally gratified to note that Radio
Free Europe has been picking up recently a good deal of support in
editorials in the United States press and elsewhere. The New York
TIMES editorial sent to me by Mr. John Baker was good, and so was a
recent editorial in the Washington POST. Ed Taylor's treatment of
the role played by Radio Free Europe during the crisis period is likewise helpful, although I feel that he has glossed over or slid by too
lightly the question of "where we go from here" with Radio Free Europe.

4, With this mich as background, I should like to proceed now
to a rough outline of polnts, not listed in their order of importance,
but which seem to me to merit the examination of the experts, includ.
ing such people as Bill Griffiths and the Polish elements of the Radio
Free Europe desks: ,

—y a For the present, Polish friends and fellow lovers of

liberty, continue to stand firm on the gains which you have

made, but take no risks and engage yourselves in no forms of |
_ Violent action which would be apt to give a pretext to the !

Soviet authorities or the Stalinist elements remaining within

your own governmental structure to take retaliatory action
against you. Your gains have been great and it is of primary .

importance at the present moment these gains should be consol
idated and not lost. GOMULKA has show himself capable of

extracting large benefits from the Russians and wlth your

Bupport he may well. be able to see these all the way through,

with resulting considerable benefits to the people of Poland

generally. This is therefore not a time to press and crowd

against GOMULKA nor to levy upon him demands which are more

than the traffic will bear as far as the Soviets are concerned.

Be vigilant, however, and maintain your guard constantly to

prevent a sneaking betrayal of the gains which Poland has

~ 2

: yo *
: _* sed
os fare.
Vive A la gett 8

fy pet ea AR

_ SECRET
C0O1385012

 

 

realized during the past three months,

b. Beyond this, let matters stand as they are and be grateful that the Poles for once do not need to do the major dying
that liberty might survive. ‘The finger of God this time pointed
toward Hungary and it was well pointed. The Hungarians have acquitted themselves gloriously and their spirit and will to resist
is by no means broken -~ they will fight on until they get for
themselves something at least approximating that which you Poles

presently enjoy.

c. Again -~ leave violence alone for the time and spare
yourselves for better days which are ahead, The Poles have so —
many times fought.the gallant rearguard action for freedom as —
to have bled themselves white-.and-to be without the amount of
strength which would be necessary for national. and racial survival in the event of ariother Soviet bloodbath. The world well
know the proud history of Polish martyrdom -- its procession
of sacrifices range back downward through the years from Poznan,
the General BOR uprising of 1944, the gallant double resistance
against the Nazi /Soviet onslaught of 1939, etc., ote. (giving
other examples from Polish history).

d. Also at the sam time that you are waiting and keeping

f your powder dry, as well as helping Mr. GOMULKA bring home and

distribute the bacon, the yeast of freedom is beginning to work
in other surrounding areas «~ not even excluding the Soviet
Union itself, It is in no sense a suggestion that you Poles
simply mark time for a while -- the point is that forces are at
work elsewhere which will surely have the cumulative effect of
moving things along in the direction you desire to see them go
without the necessity for further Polish sacrifices of blood.

As has already been indicated, even within the Soviet Union
itself, these forces have been at work for some time md i

the causes,.ag Well as gome of the results of this great formas,
are becoming increasingly evident. It ig all the more remarkable
and all thse more signifi cant that such things are happening with~—
in the Soviet Union, in view of the historical lack of comprehension of the principles of liberty and freedom in the Eastern

World, including Russia. In areas East of Poland and Greece = |

where despotism has always been the form of rule.=-= it was not
necessary for the czars to enslave the people, for they were
already slaves -~ helpless masses at the rulers! disposal,
ARISTOTLE spoke for Greece and for the West when he said that
Asiatics were slaves by nature. "You do not know what.
freedom is," HERODOTUS reports a Greek saying to a Persian,
"Tf you did, you would fight for it with bare hands if you had
ne weapons.'' The wise course is therefore for you to. allow
these processes to Work to your advantage and for the entire
mass to be moving along dowstream without the necessity for

 

= vr oe ee
C01385012

 

-exolusive Polish action to push it there. Radio Free Europe

will be your newspaper-of~the~air and you can depend upon us

to keep you fully informed of all these momentous developments
as they occur. There are strikes in the Soviet Union which
though small, are significant, and the ferment.among the intellectuals «= the students and the writers ~- is almost equivalent
to that which preceded some of your most recent gains. We will
keep you informed of these developMenis

@. Pay no attention whatever to KHRUSHCHEV's plaintive
pipings about the wave of the future., The wave.of the future is
freedom and it will surely roll over tyranny everywhere. Even
the Yugoslav Communist leadership is openly acknowledging the

_ coming victory of democracy and countless other ‘convinced

Commmists believe the game. (Quotes fran the MOGURN series in

the Washington POST could be used to round this out extensively --~

meny of these statements of MCGURN purporting to represent the
views of high-ranking Yugoslav Communist officials are quite
similar to things which PRIMOZIC has been saying to me recently.)

As we said before, KHRUSHCHEV had better keep his shrimp whistling

in the dark for bim ~~ he will need all of them, as well as.
barking lobsters and singing crabs.. His constant crying of the
coming victory of Communiam is in itself a measure of his own
fear, or at least he is presumed to be not so stupid as to fail
to recognize the extent te which his whole rotten regime has been
rent asunder and ig trembling at its foundations. (Here load inquite a lot of KHRUSHCHEV's attack against STALIN as showing how
he contributed to: the: undelnsining of the system upon which he now
seeks to rely.)

f. There are yet other reasons why patience is in order at
the present time. It would serve little. nee tul purpose for the
Poles to become embroiled in hostilities wiih the Russians
prior to arriving at some wundersta ith mans. There
is, of coursé, the sensitive ma extremely afficalt question of |
the Oder-Neisse line and this must be Worked out with infinite
care as. between Poland and Germany, 1.¢6., the West German
Government (which is, of course, the only government in Germany
representative of the people and whose bargains and commitments
correspondingly have any chance to be. kept or honored by the
German people themselves, let alone the Western Alliance which,
in the opinion of Radio Free Europe, should act as. the certify
 

    

. ing and guaranteeing force to set the seal of approval and

permanence upon arrangements to be worked out between Poles and
Free Germans in the first instance. As far as the East German
regime is concerned, this is a meaningless organisation and all
dealings had better be had directly with Moscow -» although it
is ok. to cut in the Kast Germans to some extent for face if

Moscow requires it and in order to obtain definite advantages 777.

There are also special reasons at the present time why the

 
/€01385012 . _—SEGRET—

 

West German Government should be especially anxious to work out
matters in such a way as to reduce tensions or help to confine
them to & controllable limit -- since they are concerned about
_the explosive forces of liberty which are working in Poland as

| well as in East Germany. Hence, this may be the most propitious
moment for a move for negotiations with Germany.

) FRANK G. WLSNER
Deputy Director (Plans)

a Be bite Oey
lt ee ets aay
£2 eH penne
fof

eet Bgd <4 gm ple)
ae I pe Aone tv lm L2H

Lu» lam
meh, Pabkner.
Lj oA

ore

 

‘
’ —

ct a mimo ii
 

SECRET

eer eee one Termes gate ened angie

 

 

INSTRUCTIONS? 16 used in’

ae ety Mew emmose a

“ct REPLACES" FORM: ‘5° 10°
“WHICH MAY-BE USED.

 

| : slit © : * : ga ;

“Ge dix664.

wees the tae wt ne

anew we ae;

2 te ee: ae en ce eee = penta

 

 

 

 

~
~
Sen eu ate ot rae?

Klee re tee et ae

 

 

ae ee

 
