 

 

C05458951 ;
AON 7 ae
6 ¢2 ym OO 7¢ - a ae :
m= UTILIZATION OF RUSSIAN POLITICAL REFUGEES _
ey fF PRES Ss TN GERMANY AND AUSTRIA
APPROVED FOR RELEASE DATE: 16-Feb-2011! (5S) |

 

The Russian volitical refugees in Germany and Austria, numbering one- |
half million embittered former Soviet citizens, constitute a tremendous
weapon of political warfare which we should make use of at the earliest nos-
sible moment. The Kremlin has been aware, from the very beginning, that
these refugees represent a menace to the Soviet Union, and has striven
with great versistency to have the refugees delivered into its hands, and,
when that endeavor failed, to have any political activity on their part
prohibited, The effective utilization of this great anti-communist force
requires the formation of a strong central organization (composed of repre-
sentatives from as many existing Russian refugee narties and groups as
possible) which will direct, develop and coordinate the anti-communist
activities of Soviet refugees. There exist already several organizations
created by the Russians on their own initiative which apvear to be engaged
in as much anti-communist activity as their limited means permit. The most
imvortant of these organizations are the NTS (National Labor Association),

& small organization which seems to hold aloof from cooperation with other
organizations; and the ATSODNR (Anti-Comminist Center of the Liberation
Movement of the Peovles of Russia), a larger organization descended from

the Vlassov Movement and comprising a variety of political groups, In addi-
tion, there are numerous smaller groups representing various shades of
volitical opinion.

 

 

 

 

 

oo | EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs

 

‘CONFIDENTIAL

 

 

cory. / if 2. uories

Sete Lent bad

 

Bir {are

 

 

i Tn carte we Te
 

c05458951_

’
®

 

When the Directing Center has been set uv, there are various lines
of activities which should be undertaken:

(1) Clandestine radio facilities should be made available in the
American Zone in Germany to the Russian anti-commnist united front for
broadcasts beyond the Iron Curtain Such
broadcasts should be directed not only to the Soviet Union, but also to
the Soviet Army of Occunation, and satellite countries.

 

 

 

a

 

 

 

ew (OF 3 wow

-

ncetntasaars Ses nisi
a
 

 

C05458951_ ry

(7) Through the Russian anti-commimist united front we would be

in a nosition to take advantage of any volitical crisis that might develon
in the U.S.5,R., as @ resu f some eseen event, such as the death of

|

| ee ee

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

at

 

 

3 Wow at

vuPY 2. OF__Z. Gurles
seston

 
