December 03, 1956 Rethinking the Role of Free Europe Committee and Radio Free Europe


11/12/1956
Revised Policies and Plans for FEC Operations


Recent developments require a new look at the activities of the Free Europe Committee and indicate the need for some major revisions and some additional action. Some of these are set forth below:


1. The U.S. objective with respect to Central Europe ought to be clearly defined. If, as there seems to be some indications, it is U.S. policy to work for a group of neutral buffer states from the XX to the Black Sea, this ought to be clearly spelled out and made known to these who are responsible for conducting psychological and political section programs targeted at Central and Eastern Europe.
2. The degree to which the West by radio broadcasts, leaflet operations and otherwise, encourages the captive people to resist to change the present regimes while at the same time the west is not willing or able to assist them is an attention like that in Hungary, presents serious questions which ought to be realistically thought through.
3. The present program of Radio Free Europe and the Free Europe Press which are principally based on a concept of encouraging the people to make demands on the regimes for changes which will benefit the people and weaken the controls of communist regimes over them, should be carefully examined. For example, the degree to which we are encouraging the Polish people to make further demands on the  X regime must be very carefully defined so that we will not be confronted with a situation in Poland like that which is put down in a bloodbath in Hungary
4. The desirability of continuing balloon operations into Poland, Hungary and X should be very carefully examined. 
5. A female for whiliting recent European escapes must be worked out. This will present problems with X to the present Hungarian national X.
6. There is a serious problem of morals within the new Hungarian escapes who believes that the West X them down. A real effort should be made to deal with this problem.
7. The Free Europe Committee’s role with respect to the several thousand new Hungarian escapes should be defined.
