CO1441022.

This docum.. consists of page(s)
_ Number | of mame S B
THE FOREION SERVICE
OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

 
   

ee

Snow

OFFICIAL-INFORNAL American EXEL Vienna Sj; | tes

ae

“ Dear Randy: — S ,

After matters had been adjusted with regard to the A ob
project designated as "Operation Lookout" (Deptel 20h7, Nov. 26, 2a
to Vienna, rptd Paris 2006, Bonn 1436, Rome 2273, Munich 259) and AO
revised travel orders were received, Tom Recknagel joined me in oe
unich on Saturday, December 8. I filled him in on data available —
there with respect to the programs of American media relating to 2 3 >
the period and the issues in question. We proceeded the following = ~ % «=< 7% 5
day to Salsburg and Vienna, respectively, and began work on Monday, = FS 2S eG
Decemer 10. ae 7 ae

By that tim, the RRP visa interviewing of Hungarian refugees in Austria was completed and the parole processing was
beginning. The Ambassador felt that information might already have
been obtained by consular officers and others at Vienna which would
be relevant to the inquiry. A quick survey of these possibilities,
however, did not produce evidence which was precisely responsive.
The interviews conducted by visa officers had been directed to other
interests and what little information was forthcoming Prawes

too vague.
INTERVIERT ARRANG FURNES AND

Accordingly, I made arrangements to fit direct interviewing
of the refugees, for the purposes of the Operation, into the
parole procedures in a manner similar to that which had been
envisaged in connection with visa processing, In this I was

in part and excise as

    

A,

aseisted at

L. Randolph Higgs, Esquire,
Special Assistant for Qperations,
Department of State,
Washington » DC.

 

SECRET
J EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs : | NM yym

ro | . 2 )

 
 

CO1441022

 

ee .
Seat - .

“8

assisted at the outset by imery R, Kiraly (on detail from —

the Department) and, for most of the time, by Fmile W, Juhass

(on detail from Stuttgart, a former member of the Peripheral

Reporting staff in Austria). These two Hungarian-speaking officers ;
were already engaged in processing the refugees for parole purposes .
and their services as interpreters were also made available to me.

Every effort was made to minimise occasion for self-serving
responsep on the pert of the refugees in consequence of their

| desire to migrate to the United States. My interviewing has taken

peace after their papers were certified to ICEM and just before |
thay moved out for transportation. In some instances the personal
acquaintance os mutual associations of !’r. Juhass with the
refugees were utilized te stimilate an atmosphere of frankness,
But foy the most part, I took subjects at random as representing a
cross-cut of types, age and place of residence,

Since the refugees are being interviewed by many others such
as MRC newaman, ICEM public relations representatives and
commercial correspondents and since most of them seem perfectly
Willing to talk, I believe the sampling done for our purposes —
will not occasion any attention.

In the circumstances, it has been impossible to apply the |
sart of controls employed in "scientific" polling. And. because.
the parole processing of the refugees whom I interviewed could
not be delayed unduly, the time and care which might normally be .
devoted to a Peripheral Reporting case have been circumscribed.

B TS OF INTERVIENS

As a result of a week's interviews with more than sixty
refugees, a pattern of response has emerged which varies only in
minor and incidental respects. Its essentials are as follows

1. A majority of the refugees interviewed claim to have been
regular listeners to Western, especially American, radios before
and during the uprising.

2. Their choiee of stations was limited somewhat by conditions

of reception. Otherwise, their likes seem to bear a strong

relation to their respective social strata: in general, those of |
the intellirentsia exprese a preference for BBC and VOA (in that | od ae
order); RPE seems to have more of a mass appeal, The reasons given ~~: "
by those who prefer BBC and VOA programs are that they display |
greater objectivity, provide less colored and more factual news,

pare
end are Gar
CO1441022

     
 
   

      

pr:

ron virvohas u¥
7 RAR OE

te: “oe ‘pasrtndlp exitgetive hate of ,
at. oppression and restivenses’ mabe
6. 60rd thon: which needed: only a spark > ti es: ‘6
' explosion... Thie. was. supplied by. Oere!s ap )
5. from Budapest, and. by the AV. shootings: The “povalk a" C:
i “gnorgandged: and unanticipated ‘when the: wk terre: and s studente:
“.: (angouraged by Polish suocesses) made their initial demands
a matter of. feet, the active Astence was Ereenpe i ta
* anth-Commung 5! -ehesente: Dut: volTecu
& sontet . «refugees Bay:

in the senge. of: having helped to keep: alive ideas and
- treadea,, an awarenege of Vester sympathy, hope’ Soba.
future.and e latent opleit, of, iesedve) vpniatene
he “aa of the: amubjects: diterviewed: have’ nt tat
 hearing.of: any specific Amértean radio. programe wit
LL te cmpeci taneein military aid. Nevertheless, « L
FS ™ the most sophisticated have stated that they, their .a

oo. > andthe Hungarien-people generally expected scm i
Sate, = - assistance from abroad;. aitheughy for. the: most pas
oe ae . - . gongedved in vague. terms.” A odhsiderable- inn wr oi
oy a, have averted a nape: af: receiving | armazent: atend ea (depo

 
 
 
   
  
 
  
         
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
  

  

 

    
 

aot

 

    

ae
abe |
sels
th

   

 

 
     
    

ee 4 a > deckadve pressure to effech-a iy
cs : heve sppresped. the helief tet ‘ al Ef
threatened enather stor id: wep: tn itch meg 28 ‘Hawi’
armed dntervention aprang frox eke | oat “need, won have ié

aa that radio reports of current developments in: tie Beli ‘and

Western atrples (although vet ‘inflame tory: oo

cae gontartbuted-te:, tha. ier ti Laid wens hed

poe oe. _ forthoasingy: id. ea ae a) " Ae

me “

se, ia are fd.

ee

 
   
 
 
  
 
 
      
  

   

 

‘au oe ey

the: sibjowts ipemrierl ‘Ov i

}
mt
yr I & pao el

    
 

CQO1441022

BOCAS
coljmn

contribution comparable to that mentioned above. A couple

of exceptions to this response proved either to be hearsay or
lacked specificity as to whether blame was attributable to the
radios themselves (in particular, RFE) or to the Hungarian
freedom stations (some of whose appeals RFE relayed back into
Hungary). The subjects agree that Western broadcasts (induding .
those of American media) performed a highly valuable and weloome
service during the critical period as the only source of dependable
information for the Hungarian people, facilitating contact between
different sections of their country, bolstering internal
solidarity, communicating outside interest, and supporting a
feeling that they were not left alone.

In this sense, the media are said to have sustained the
spirit of active resistance, but also in this sense were not |
criticised by any of the refugees interviewed, All agree that
the prolongation of the fighting was due to such factors as the
apparent initial successes of the insurgence, the spirit of
outrage or revenge against AVO and Soviet actions (including the
crack-down of Novenber 1) and a determination, springing from
strictly Hungarian motivation, to contime resistance by whatever
means 80 long as possible, The subjects have been unanimous in
the opinion that the f‘chting would have kept on regard) ess of
the media, .

6. As to specific programs before or during the orisis to which
the subjects interviewed might have taken exception, a great
preponderance of them stated either positively that they had no
objections or could not recall any programs which left a.
sufficiently adverse impression to cits. A few expressed dislike
for "the exaggerated tone" of RPZ broadcasts; two of than...
mentioned in particular the commentaries of "Gallicus” (vis:
Imre Mikes). One said he found distasteful the broadcasting of
jazs programs while people were dying. One thought RFE spent too
mich time conveying messages of refugees that would have been better
spent on news. These criticisms, however, appeared to be ©
essentially a matter of personal taste, not directly pointed to
potentially basic faults in question. A more serious complaint of.
one subject was that RFE's refugee messages tended to pin-point
relatives and friends remaining in Hungery. (I understand that
these messages may in fact have merited this criticism when they
were initiated, but that subsequently precautions were taken to
avoid identification by the hostile agencies).
——_———————

————

c01441022

 

. SEGRE
5
7, vith rugard to balloon leaflet operations, my “inewtry. at”
Vienna has developed by and large only a slight fret hard
aequaantenes on the part of the refugees ‘interviewed =< less ag

wgards the Budapest area and somewhat more as concerns other :
parts of Hungary, A very few among the refugees express ing
opinions in this regard considered the leaflet operation |
unnecessary under conditions where radio reception is adequatey.
Only one subject stated an objection to the operation on the
ground of danger to 4a person found with a leaflet in his possession.
None of those ihterviewed have raised objection on the score of
an. . alleged safety hagard, Fost affirm a view that the leaflet

‘eration 1g a useful supplement to radio broadeas ting especially

tor rural areas.

C. OBSERVATIONS .AND EVALUATION

My observations on the results of the interviewing to date.
are as follows:

1. In another context than that within whieh my inquiry has beén
conducted (viz. interviewing by an American official in connection

with the processing of refugees for onward migration to the

United States) significant differences of response might be.

obtained. I understand that the results of Tom Recknagel's

inquiry even under similar conditions differ to some extent from

mine, Ina few informa] conversations with newspaper correspondents

and ICEM public relatio:s representatives during my atay in Vienna, =.
mention has been volunteered by them-of refugee complaints against oe.
the media, However, disoreet questioning on my part has failed to je"
elicit anything concrete from such sources. ‘They have either fal legen? ;
to obtain particulars from the refugees or have not differentiated °-"
between what might be attributable to the radios themselves (as. in
their commentaries) and thoroughly legitimate reporting by ‘the

radios (as, for example, of UN developments or statenmonts. by Weptern
spokesmen). A meaningful evaluation of the question, of course,
requires delicate precision of evidence. Out of their intensely

felt need and certain misapprehensions.for which the media were not
responsible, the Hungarians evidently developed expectations which

may improperly be attributed to the media. An extreme example of.

such a possibility is illustrated by one or two of the persons [ |

have interviewed vho had the impression that a sizable Oerman

military establishment already existed (a notion which had been
carefully fostered by Commnist propayanda), They say that when
Chancellor Adenauer voiced German sympathy for the Hungarian peoples
and expressed a desire to be halpful in such ways as possible, sane

of then interpreted this as a prospect of Cerman armed intervention.

  

a ee
TAR
aes ee

 

Whatever

SECRET
 

c01441022

SEQRET
_

Whatever the exact phrasing of Adenaver's statement, 1t would
douttless have been quoted. by the media and could even become the
basis of a complaint that the media had misled the insurgents, |

In such soil, rumors of complaints against the: media may have roots |
and need to be earefully explored. 7

2. It is my opinion also that resporses of the refugees at this —
date may differ significantly from those which might have been
obtained from even the same perzons at the height of the crisis
and in the immediate reagtion to events following upon the Soviet |
tnvasion of Movember 4. The refugees have had time and opportunity
to become more fully informed, to reflect upon the matters at —
tssue and to discuss then with their fellow refugees. It is
inevitable that their initial reactions have been modified and:
probably mellowed. with the passage of time after the first
frustrations,
3. Translations of RFE Hungarian program scripts for the period
in question were being received at my office in lfunich before my
departure and being foivrarded to you. Of perhaps 100 of these .
scripts which I had opportunity to scan, I found several which T. .
considered highly questionable and one which was particularly |
bad from the standpoint of this inquiry. Dick Condon,. whem I
saw this past week in Vienna, stated that out of some 200+300.
Hungarian programs of the period, they had found abovt 26 whieh
stiolld not have been broadcast. On this tepic I shat] write .
separately, J mention it now because I was prepared to hear =~
‘specific complaints fran the refugees against RFE. What is. of a oe
special interest 14s that these failed to. develop, My Luynrene$pn as _
| {s that, however faulty such programs may have. bean, they did not-| have a far-reaching effect in producing adverse reactions by the
|} Hungarians or in altering the course of events in Raney

4. J have interrupted my interviewing. $0 give you thts sin of
my findings to date, partly because I roelige that tine ia cary
essense of their utility to you and partly because the- pattern of 7
response has become so strikingly clear and consistent. that. I doubt dt
will be altered by additional numbers of interviews. In any event; |
at the rate of parole ease processing, interviewing in that oe
connection probably cannot be continued much longer. And, as: a”
indicated above, T doubt that secondary sources of. information wil} ”
prove fruitful, Possibly additional data useful to the inquiry nay
be developed in the course of regular Peripheral emer eene: from”
fustria, Germany and elsewhere...

oT now

SECRET
C01441022 a,

CECR ET

~Je

I know that RFE he: conducted an inquiry of its own (both
tv analysis of scripts and refugee interviews) on which it
sunortim! to the New Yorx office. This was not made directly
ivailelie to the Consulate General before my departure and may
if traated as only an internal matter between RFE/Munich and
vO Mem York. Some of those who had a responsible hand in it
nade a stneere effort ot objectivity and an attempt to avoid _
yhitewash. I am reliably informed

ae

As soon as my notes on the tndividual interviews can be
yerfed into finished form, I shall farward them to you far
Joetailed Lllustration of the above summary,

 

 

 

I should like to recard my aprreciation for the cooperation
> Reve received at Vienna in every necessary respect.

“y best wishes to you and Jack for. the holiday season,

Sincerely,

/s/ Nick
Horace J. Nickels
American Consul

VaIvy

ret Vienna
hoor
Munich

SECRET
