Nov 19, 1956
Review of Radio Free Europe Hungarian Broadcasting


1. Broadcast Policy for RFE during period 20th CPSU Congress, 14-27 Feb 1956, and 23 Oct 1956


In line with National Security Council policy and with the guidance of the Department of State, the policy governing RFE’s broadcasts to be European satellites during this period was based on the following principal points:


1. To encourage peaceful evolutionary changes working toward the liberalization of institutions, and decentralization of authority and decision making power to the point where a return to Stalinist measures would be politically imprecilicable for regime or party leaders.
2. To cross-report the progress of anti-Stalinism and the achievement of a degree of liberalization in the several captive nations.
3. To take full propaganda advantage of the Belgrade Declaration which states, questions of internal organizations or differences in social systems are solely the concern of the individual countries.


Additionally, it is important to note that an RFE policy directive, dated 13 Dec 1951, stated categorically:
        XXX
This directive has remained in full effect, and the policies of Hungary, Poland and the other satellites have seen encouraged to look not to armed revolt, but to the gradual relaxation of the de-Stalinization process as their best hope of eventual freedom.


2. Broadcast contest during the period 20th CPSU Congress and 23 Oct 1956


During this period RFE (as well as Free Europe leafiate) played the Ehrusbebar “secret speech” heavily, reported western reaction and the reaction of various commmunist party leaders is the West to the secret speech; gave full play to the Belgrade Declaration of “differing roads to Socialism”; gave appropriate treatment to the rehabilitation of various Tiaoists and national communities throughout the satellite area; reported all evidences of the liberalization process wherever taking place; and gave full play to the attemptes of Gemulka to establish greater freedom from Soviet control in Poland.


RFE has also repeatedly broadcast messages of hope and encouragement expressed by President Eisenhower, Secretary Dulles, Adiai Stevenson and other American political, religious, labor, agricultural and business leaders. Pledging that the cause of the eventual freedom of the captive people would remain a basic part of American Government policy and would be kept foremost on the world’s council tables. It also broadcast the resolution of the United States Senate and the platforms of both the Republican and Democratic parties calling for freedom of the captive people by peaceful means.


3. Revisions in RFE’s Broadcast Policy since 23 Oct 1956


With the field situation in Poland and with considerable ferment X in Hungary prior to 23 Oct, RFE policy guidance was modified to:
1. Give greater emphasis to the liberations and widening of the thaw in Poland and Hungary
2. Give more emphasis to the nationalistic tendencies in the satellites and
3. Urge the removal from positions of authority of specific pro-stalinist leaders.
These aims were to be achieved primarily through factual reporting. RFE was advised to avoid tactical advice or the identification of RFE with indigonous opposition elements.


On 25 Oct, RFE was specially authorized to give full coverage to broadcasts of patriot radies which, because of their low power and because of Soviet and other satellite X, could be heard only in limited areas.


RFE was also authorized to broadcast in Russian to Soviet troops in Hungary.


4. Radio Broadcasts to Hungary during the period 23 Oct to 4 Nov 1956


RFE, largely basing its information on extensive monitoring of Hungarian radio stations, immediately began broadcasts of the demonstrations which began on 23 Oct in Budapast Square. As the peaceful demonstrations changed to revolutions, and as various local Hungarian radios fell into the hands of patriots. RFE also began to report the broadcasts of such radios throughout the country. By this means the general population outside Budapast became better informed about the course of the uprising. RFE also broadcasts western reaction to Hungarian events, including statements by the President of the U.S., the secretary of state, and expressions of solidarity with the patriots on the part of western trade unions, student groups and other leaders and organizations. RFE gave full play to reaction against the use of Soviet military repression, and also fully covered the action on the part of the United Nations with respect to Hungary. During this period, RFE also broadcast various appeals to Soviet troops in Hungary not to fire on the Hungarian people who were fighting for freedom, and urged the withdrawal of such troops from Hungary.


As far as can be determined from a review of scripts currently available in English, no RFE broadcast to Hungary before the revolution beginning on 23 Oct could be considered as inciting the Hungarian people to armed revolt. No RFE broadcast to Hungary has stated to implied promises of American military intervention.


However, between 23 Oct and 4 Nov 1956, a few of the scripts reviewed do indicate that RFE occasionally went beyond the X factual broadcasting of the demands of the patriot radio stations within Hungary to identify itself with these demands and to urge their achievement. After the revolution was well under way, there was some evidence of attempts by RFE to provide technical advice to the patriots as to the course the rebellion should take and the individuals best qualified to lead it. As soon as these deviations from policy were noted, additional steps were taken to ensure rigid supervision of broadcasting contests. Tapes of the actual broadcasts are expected shortly and will be reviewed by Hungarian language specialists. 


5. Commands by the Government of Irnre X Negy and Jesos X Kadar on Western Preservation of the Revolution.


The first and most determined attack on RFE as a part of the "espitalistic plot" responsible for the uprising came from kremlia X sources. Radio Moscow and Pravda both linked RFE to the "imperialist plot to overthrow the Hungarian peopel's Democracy" However, the official Hungarian radio, speaking for the X Nagy Government on 29 Oct, quoted XX, the official Hungarian communist newspaper, in response to the Pravda article as follows:
"In its last X, pravda published the report of its correspondent about the Hungarian situation. Its title is: The collapses of the adventure directed against the people in Hungary. This is an error. What happened in Budaport was not directed against the people. It was not an adventure and it did not collapse. Bombs were exploding for five days, the machine guns distributed death for five days, this twon suffered for five days." The slogans of socialist democracy were the loudest and not those of the reaction or of the counter-revolution. The revolting people of P X and Buda want freedom, and a life without arbitrarines, terror and fear. More bread and national independence. This is what Pravia called an adventure against the people? Something really collapsed, that was the rule of the Rahausi-Gere ellipse!


The article pretended that the undermining work of American and English imperialists was the cause of the manifestations of the Budapost population and of the revolt. We must sincerely say that this desieration of the Pravada is insulting for the whole population of Budapost. The majority of Budapost  - with body or soul - participating in the manifestation of Thursday, felt with the basic, patriotic and democratic aims of the popular manifestation. Not some undermining work produced the bloody treasing but X fight that lasted five days but our own X and X, and first of all the fruit that we did not safeguard the X fire inherited from our ancestors; the national independence.


On 11 Nov, Janes Kadar, present head of present puppet Hungarian Government, broadcast over Radio Budapost:


"We must all agree that the real reason for the peoples movement which started on 23 Oct must be sought in the serious faults and crimes which have been committed by the Rakosi Clique which was greatly influencing the regime of the country and the party and which caused great damages to the working population of the country." 


6. Conclusions
1. Policy guidance provided to RFE and by RFE to its Hungarian dock was consistent with U.S. policies toward the satellites. RFE broadcasts were generally consistent with such policies. 
2. From all information available to date. RFE did not directly or by implication offer hope that American military help would be forthcoming to the patriots.
3. From all information available to date. RFE did not incite the Hungarian people to revolution.
4. RFE broadcasts went somewhat beyond specific guidelines to identifying itself with Hungarian patriot aims, and in offering certain tactical advice to the patriots 
5. The chronology of events in Hungary and the statements of lmre Nagy and of Januos Kadar make it clear that the uprising resulted from ten years of Soviet repression and was finally spreaded by the shooting on 23 Oct of peaceful demonstrators, and did not result from any external force, such as RFE broadcasts or Free Europe leaders. 
 