November 08, 1956
Department of State, Outgoing Telegram to Moscow
Embassy

Citation:

“Department of State, Outgoing Telegram to Moscow Embassy,” November 08, 1956, History and
Public Policy Program Digital Archive, Obtained and contributed to CWIHP by A. Ross Johnson
Department of State, Record Group 59, National Archives of the United States.
http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/134612

 

Summary:

The State Department requests that the embassy find out the status of an American citizen who works
for Radio Free Europe who was detained in Hungary by Soviet military authorities

Original Language:

English

Contents:

* Scan of Original Document




SENT T0:  Amembassy MOSCOW

Anenbassy LODON aK 9

e Amembassy VIENNA 745 4
RPT INFO: Amcongen MUNICH tinge}

Wes Amlegation BUDAPEST timtmix 2) 3

 

 

 

Embassy Moscow #8 requested at earliest possible time deliver following.
note at level Foreign Office Ambassador considers appropriate:

QUOTE Embassy of USA presents compliments Ministry Foreign Affairs USSR
i the honor pees that US Govt informed that on or about November 5
Frederick Terens Hier, bearer US passport 671 issued Salzburg Austria Mey 8,
was arrested and confined by Soviet military euthorities at Gyor, Eumgery. 1
Since that date no information on Mr. Hier's whereabouts or condition has ee
received, [ii HierGis \journahetkenploysd Radic Mrae Murope < o

QUOTE US Government urgently requests Government of USSR to Anveeeaate
circumstances of Mr. Hier's detention and to take measures necessary for his
immediate release and repatriation, QUOTE

Embassy should orally inform Foreign Office that this info was supplie
by Soviet representative§ to members of Austrian Caritas and Red Cross convoy.
which reached Vienna from Budapest November 6, This report subsequently
confirmed by journalists end other persons leaving Hungary.

Embassy Moscow is also requested te furnish copy of note when delivered

to. British and Austrian missions in Moscow with following additional info:




pckortact| born October 27, 1
87245 PA/52 Vienne issued December 23, 1952 expires Dect

1 budepest, bearer Austrion pasrport TV

 

  

ender 22, 1957. Tomar

 

carries Manchester Guardian press card issued to Eric Gedys RIE Viema Chiof

with letter in German stating Gedye gave Tormey permission string for
cuandien tn SABIE place.

Third nan, according AEB, JERZY GST POXTETEWSET, torn Sept 19, 1906
at Przowodovo, Poland, Ke is reported to have British travel docunont which
4ncluded US reentry permit 3266 desued New York Sept 2, 1953 and belioved
renewed subsequently.

In furnishing British end Austrian missions copy of note and supplenentary

info, Enbasey Moscow may indicate US vot

  

welcome any Parallel actions they
ney consider appropriate. Amembassy London and Vienna nay in their discretion
inform respective foreign ministries of ection envisaged. Dept has notified
Britich and Austrien Embacsies in Washington of foregoing.

FIT Dept

 

endeavoring to avoid publicity as long as possible in

hopes that such action may improve chances doviots will release Hier before

 

it becomes prestige matter. It ic highly uilikelyy hoveverg publicity can be

avoided long. Dept. has no evidence Hier oijteined passport velidetion travel.

vis employee Radio Ivep Bunope as

Dopmay! and