Digital Archive

- digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org
International History Declassified

 

W Wilson
Center
July 13, 1956

National Security Council Discussion of Policy Toward
Eastern Europe

Citation:

“National Security Council Discussion of Policy Toward Eastern Europe,” July 13, 1956, History and
Public Policy Program Digital Archive, Obtained and contributed to CWIHP by A. Ross Johnson. Cited
Ch3 n6 in his book Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, NARA release courtesy of Malcolm Byrne,
National Security Archive. Unredacted text of redacted document 79, FRUS, 1955-1957, XXV, 212216

http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/114691

Summary:

Senior officials discuss US policy at a National Security Council (NSC) principals’ meeting on July 12.
Notwithstanding less cautionary views expressed by Vice President Nixon at the NSC discussion, on
July 18 President Eisenhower approved a minor modification of the draft (NSC 5608 and the annex)
as NSC 5608/1 to serve as a basic statement of U.S. policy (published as redacted document 80,
FRUS, 1955-57, XXV ; unredacted document 17, Békés, Byrne, and Rainer, The 1956 Hungarian
Revolution).

Credits:

This document was made possible with support from the Blavatnik Family Foundation and the Leon
Levy Foundation.

Original Language:

English

Contents:

e Scan of Original Document
ea NG ote Laer Lis rary
ame meagan

 

_ any a

Visenubower: Paners, 1993-61 pba SECREP

(,na Whitman file)

July 13, 1956

MET SORANDUM

SUBJECT: Discussion at the eG$O0th Meeting
of the Fational Security Council,
Thursdsy, July 12, 1956

At the 2eg0th Council meeting, the following were present: |

Tne Vice President of the United States, presiding; the Secretary
of State; the Secretary of D2fense; and the Director, Office of Defexse Mobilization. Also present were the Secretary of the Tressury; the Attorney General; Mr. Amos J. Penaslee for the Special Assistant to the President for Disarmament; the Director, Bureau of
the midget; the Special Assistant to the President for Atomic Enexsy (varticipating in the action on Items 3 and 4); the Director,
U. S. Information Agency; the Under Secretary of State; the Deputy
Ezcretary of Defense; Assistant Secretary of State Bowle; the
Crairran, Joint Chiefs of Starf; the Director of Central Intellisence; the Baputy Assistant to the President; Special Assistants
to the President Anjerson end Jackson; the White Eouse. Staff Sec
\ retary; the Execctive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive |
S2cretery, NSC.

Tere follows a suriery of the discussion at the meeting
and the main points tahen.

1. U. S. POLICY TOW Tee SOVIET SATELLITES IN EAST!RN EUROFE
Gyse 5003 and Annex to NSC 5 3 NSC Action No. 1530-b; NSC
5505/1; NSC 174; Memos for All Holders of NSC 5608, dsted
July 5 and 6, 1956; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary,
same subject, dated July 11, 1956)

     

Mr. Anésrson briered the Council on the main 7estures of
the proposed new policy, particulerly es it differed from the existing policy on the subject, HSC 174. When he reached paregraph 25,
lir. Anderson pointed out the split views. As proposed by the ma
jority of the Planning Board, the paragreph would read:

"Seek authority for and use, as appropriate, greater
flexibility in U. S. economic policies (both tncentives
: end restrictions) toward the satellites."

‘nn Tie Treasury member of the Planning Board wished to delete the first
Tour words. Mr. Anderson suggested that this might be a suitable

DECLASSIBHED SHITH DELETIONS

BQ 12050. a 3 rit {

Upp! YS-b o*

     
 

    
  
“Yap we LLLENLCwEr Llorary
th tt AEN a TN I TTT, eet re Irate ase igs

Eisenhower:

Paners, 1953-61

(‘Ann Whitman file)

time for the Council to determine which version it preferred, and
invited Secretary Humphrey to speek to the Treasury position.

Secretary Humphrey said that the position of the Treasury Department was quite a simple one. It seemed to them that,
with all the difficulties which the Administration was now encountering with the Congress, it was wholly unrealistic to go to the
Congress and ask them to agree to legislation which would permit
us to give surplus esricultural commodities to the Soviet satel
TOP SECRET,
ene ae

lites. It was simply impossible, according to Secretary Humphrey, ~

to get any such concession from Congress. They were opposed to
any liberalizetion of Public Law 480 vis-a-vis the Soviet satellites. To make the attempt to induce e liberalization would only
succeed in arousing a storm of protest in Congress and further
complicate our alreedy involved situation.

Dr. Flemming inquired whether the Secretary of State and
the Secretary of Agriculture had not already requested authority
from Congress for greater flexibility in carrying out economic policles toward the satellites. Secretary Dulles replied that all
that they hed sought was authority to barter goods with countries
vehind the Iron Curtain. Moreover, he added, he hed not in mind
asxing anything more of the Congress by wey of authority in this
areca.

Secretary Wilson seid thet he went along with the position taken by Secretary Humhrey toverd tais course of action, but
that he aid so for different reasons than Secretary Huwuvhrey. He
was not opposed to seeking esdditional authority from Congress
sinply because to do so was inexpedient at this time, but rather
because he did not wish to see the standard of living in the satellites raised through the agency of U. S. surplus food. If the
satellite standard of living was raised, it would indirectly promote both the political stability end the military power of the
sc.tellite states. In sum, trading on a preferred besis with the
Communists in itezs of food value was a very doubtful course of
action. It would be doubtful even if the people of the United
States and tke Congress could be induced to support it.

Secretary Dujles said that he believed there was eae misunderstending of the intention of this paragreph. It was not the
objective of this peragraph or this paper to encoursge any level
of trade with the Soviet satellites. The objective was simply to
put the U. S. Government in a vosition to be able to make offers
of surplus materials to the satellite governments which these govexmments could not reject without simultaneously putting pressure
on the USSR to match the U. S. offer of surplus food. Moreover,
no satellite governzient would be able to accept any U. S. offer of
surplus food without affording the United States increased politice] influence in that satellite. Essentially, therefore, this
we EG we Lhe ULltdialry
ose ;
Siserhower: Paners, 1953-61 pk SECRET

‘trun Whitman file)

was not a matter of trade, but rather of economic and political
warfare. The United States simply must be in a position to be
able to make these gestures and feints in its duelling with the
Comiunists. Thus, for example, when we made our offer recently
to the people of Poznen, we never seriously thought that we would
be able to provide food to these people. Our main ides was to
embarrass the Government of Communist Polend. In concluding,
Secretary Dulles once again repeated that he was not now seeking
any new authority, along the lines suggested by paragraph 25,
from the Congress at this time.

Mr. Anderson pointed out that it wes generally understood that en effort would be made to secure Congressional agreement for the sale of surplus cocmodities in return for local currencies. This, he believed, underlay paragreph 25.

Secretary Humphrey said that in general when this Government sold surplus agricultural commodities to foreign countries, it
geve beck the local currencies thus generated to the country which
received the surplus food. This being the general pattern.of our
Perfomence, Secretary dunphrey predicted that we would get into
terrible trouble if we followed this patterm of operations in dealing with the satellites.

. Tre Vic2 President egreed that from the practical standpoint the lenguage of paregraph 25, calling for additional authority and sréeter flexibility in U. S. economic policies toward the
satejJlites from the Congress, posed a political impossibility at
this tine. Later on we may educate Congress into understanding
more clearly our reasons ror seeking such additional flexibility.
Accordingly, the Vice President said he agreed with the Treasury

proresal to delete the first four words of the paragraph.

Secretery Dulles again stated emphatically thet he hedn't
the slightest idea of going before Congress for anything at the present tins; and if any such proposel es this was inherent in peregreph
25, it wes nothing less than ridiculous, particular with the Con- ‘
gress about to adjourn. Was anybody, he aaked, actually sugcesting
that tne Administretion should now go to Congress for more authority
for carrying out flexible economic policies vis-a-vis the satellites?
Accordingly, he said, he was quite prepared to agree to drop the
bracketed four words. Subsequently, if the situation warranted, we
could seek euthority for more flexible action from the Congress.

Secretary Wilson agreed, and pointed out that Secretary
Dulles was essentially engeging in a poker game. It wes a poker
e2n2 which Secretary Wilson said he understood but did not like.
In eny event, if the Secretary of State needed more authority later
on, he could probably get it.

-3- BOP S*CRET™
— ni ci isi Prep per en rips

Eisenhower:

Papers —a Al 
(Ann Whitman file)

The Vice President co:mented that he rather inclined to
support of Secretary Dulles’ voker playing, though he wes not very
hopeful that the results would be successful. Secretary Dulles
aceain pointed out that he had little idea that the satellite governments would ever accept our offers of surplus food, but the
very fect that we meade these offers would serve to embarrass the
Corriunist governments of the satellite states. The Vice President
noted that the Soviets themselves were now engaged in playing much
the sane game as Secretary Dulles wes proposing to play against
them. The Soviets were making offers of assistance to our allies.
They know that our allies are not likely to accept these offers,
but they hope that the mere offers will prove embarressing to us.

Mr. Anderson proposed deletion of the first four words
of paregreph 25, the Council egreed, and Mr. Anderson went on to.
conclude his briefing of the remainder of the paper. (A copy of
Mr. An@zrson's brief is filed in the minutes of the meeting.)

When Mr. Anderson had finished, Secretary Dulles stated
hst he had a proposed new paragraph which he would like to suggest should be inserted after the present paregraph 20, which per
agraph 20 read as follows:

"Encourege the satellite peonles in pessive resistance to their Soviet-domineted regimes when this will
contribute to mininizing satellite contributions to Soviet power or to increasing pressures for desirable
chance. Avoid tnciterents to violence or to action
wnen the proceble reprissls or other resnlts would
yield ea net loss in terms of U. S. objectives."

Faravraph 20, continued Secretary Dulles, seemed to him and to some
of his associates in the State Department, eas rather too negative
in character. He thought a somewhat different note and a more positive ore would be struck by his proposed new paragraph, which he
reed to the Council as follows:

"In seneral, however, do not discourage, by public
mutverences or otherwi se, spontaneous manifestetions of
discontent end opposition to the Communist regime, despite risks to individuals, when their net results will

exert pressures for relesse from Soviet domination. Operations wnich might involve or lead to local violence
will be authorized only by the Secretary of State and
the Director of CIA on the besis of feasibility, minimm
risk, and maximen contribution to the fundamental interest of the United States."

POP SECRET
wei de BLECLLCker Llorery

 

Eisenhower: macure, 1953-4Al (Ann Whitman file)

S2cretary Dulles added that he end some of his essociates felt that
the statement on pessive resistance in paragraph 20, particularly
as it was explained and delineated in the corresponding paregraphs
of the Staff Study (Annex to NSC 5608), did not adequately recognize the fact that/at the present stage of world affairs it might
be quite useful for the United States to have some violent outbursts in the satellite countries. Moreover, we shouldn't necesserily be eprpalled by the fact that if such uprisings occurred a
certain number of people would be killed. After all, one cannot
defend or regain liberty without some inevitable loss of life.

Of course, continued Secretary Dulles, we did not want to see a
lot of low-level officials running around stirring up riots
and uprisings in the satellite countries. ch uprisings should
only be encoureged in exceptional circumstances. Support should
be given to them only after the most careful and cautions consideration at the very highest levels of the United States Government.
This, in sum, was the purport of his proposed new psragraph.

Secretary Wilson wondered why the Council could nof€ agree
to teke out some of the “sort words" from the present paragraph 20,
instead of adding some harsher words in a new paragraph 21. He then
referred to the Dirksen Amendnent.* He said he did not think that
this wes a wise amendment, because it would put the United States
on record before the world es appropriating money to stir up trouble
. tehind the Iron Curtain. This he thought was unwise. Secretary
Dulles egreed with Secretary Wilson, and pointed out that the Soviets were already publicizing the purport of the Dirksen Anendment to the disadvantzce of the United States.

Tne Vice President ssid that he would be most reluctant
to approve any policy which seemed to follow the George Kennan line
that there was essentielly nothing we could do about the unbsppy
stavus quo now existing in the Soviet satellites. If our policy
taper were to be couched in terms that would be discouraging to
the deviocratic elements in the satellite popniations, this would
b2 a very great error. Moreover, continued the Vice President,
it wes naive to imagine that the existence of a lot of neat little
inispendent Comzunist states throughout the world would help to
solve the security problem of the United States, though the Vice
President acmitted thet the existence of such states might be more
aavantazeous than the present situation, in which the satellite
states were under the thumb of the Soviet Union. Summing un, the
Vice President said he did not relish the tenor of the present
paper in suggesting that the United States should relex because
it can do nothing to remedy the unhappy conditions in the setel
lites.

* Acandment to the Mutual Security Act.

~5- MOP Sita

SS er Gor SECRET
eahiiles ie AISONLOWEr Library |
Eisenhower: Paners, 1953-Al ~
(Ann \Vhitman file)

Dr. Flemming said that his thoughts ran along the sane
line as the Vice President's. For this reason he strongly supported the new paragraph proposed by the Secretary of State.

Turning to Mr. William Jackson and Mr. Allen Dulles, the
Vice President called on them for their views. He inquired what
the effect on the activities headed up by these individuals the
adovtion of the proposed new policy on the setellites would have.

Mr. Jackson replied that adoption of NSC 5608 would have
the effect of encouraging this Government to be more active in the
satellites short of violence. The current scene in the setellites
wis more favorable today for U. S. action than it had been for a
long time, and the United States_should exert itself more vigorously vis-a-vis the satellites./ Actual encouragement of violence >
in the satellites should be the exception rather than the rule.
Moreover, Mr. Jackson doubted the wisdom of actually insertin e
Secretary of State's prcposed new peregraph in the policy paper.

In his reply to the Vice President's question, Mr. Allen
Malies ssid that if the new paper were edopted the CIA could easily
continue all the activities which it is now carrying on vis-a-vis
the setellites--such things as support of Radio Free Europe, balloons, support of exile groups, defection, and the like. Fea the
otter nand, Mr. Dulles said ke would rather prefer that the second
scutence in Secretary Dulles' proposed new paragraph be omitted
from the policy statement and placed instead in the Record of Ac- ~
tion. He particulerly did not think it arpropriate for the Director of Central Intelligence to be assigned a direct policy-making
function, as seemed to be inplied by this sentence. }

Secretary Dulles said that Mr. ALlen Dulles' surgestions
were perfectly agreeable to him, and he had no objection] to putting

the second sentence of his proposed new péregraph in the Record of

Action rather than in the policy statement. Mr. Anderson pointed

out that this suggestion was not a cure for the ailment. The Rec
ords of Action of the Council have aimost as wide a circulation as

the policy caper itself.| He therefore suggested that the sentence

in question could be put in a special covert appendix to NSC 5608,

or else in a memorandum having very limited circulation. After fur
teer discussion, Mr. Anderson seid he gethered it was the consensus

that we shoulda 2ad the Tirst sentence of the Secretary of State's
proposed new paregraph to the end of the present peresreph 20, and (
omit the second sentence of the Secretary of State's proposed new

reragraph. This vas agreed. .

The Vice President then seid he wented to get back to his
ri

eprlier question. Turning to Mr. Allen Dulles and to Mr. Streibert,
ne said he wented to test out his understending of what this paper

- 6- oR SECRER
Septet Ife Rec unuerwul Lairary
LL eh Tre eS

as * L
sgn ie Se eel) eg eS wien

Eisenhower: Paners, 1953-61
‘Ann Whitman file)

aOP “SECRET

would mean to officials like these who would have to carry out the
cvolicy. As he understood it, adoption of this new policy statement
would involve the attempt to echieve two objectives vis-a-vis the
Soviet satellites. The first of these was the same objective as in
the old satellite paper--namely, the restoration of a democratic
and popular governzuent to the satellite nations. Second, a new and
vossibly a more realistic objective was to support the development
of national Comminist states, free of Soviet domination, like Yugoslavie. This was, in short, another string to our bow, but, as the
Vice President understood it, we still proposed to pley on both
strings. Mr. Streibert replied that this was his understanding of |
nsc 5608, end he strongly favored the addition of the Secretary of
State's first sentence, which he believed would be helpful to the
op2rations of the USTA.

Secretary Dulles pointed out that the adoption of the
lemsueze he proposed would help to mitigate the implications of the
laneuzge set forth in paragraph 37 of the Staff Study (Annex to NSC
5603). This lencuege in the Staff Study had worried him a good
Geal, beceuse of its negetive quality, especially taken in conjunction with paregravh 20 of the policy statement. If we had nothing
but tois lenqguage in parewraph 20, we would be prevented fron teking eny actions to encourage manifestations like the East German
revolt of July 1954 and the recent uprising im Poznan. Sometimes
unrest of this sort and uprisings lite these were an important part
of the way we heave to play the game in the present situation we are
confronting with the Soviet Union.

Mr. Anderson suggested that the same reasons which dictated
the elinination of the last sentence of the paregreph proposed by the
Secretary of State, also applied to the phrase "despite risks to in-~
dividuals" which occurred in the first sentence of the Secretary of
State's proposal. On the other hand, the Vice President thought
that this phreseolecy should continue to be included because it represented a reslistic understanding. After all, we are not saying
that we are going to initiate uprisings end violence in the satellites. We are merely saying that we will not always discourege such
uprisings and violence if the uprisings should occwr sponteneously.
Tae policy peper, concluded the Vice President, should not be too
"soft" in character.

At tnis point Mr. Allen Dulles expressed concern about the.
convent of paragraph 23, reading as follows:

"As @ means of encoureging the eventual establishment
of freely elected governments in the satellites end not as
an end in itself, be prepared on e case-by-case tasis to
essist "National Communist” movements where U. S. and free
world cohesion would not be jeopardized thereby. While
evoiding the appesrence of encouraging the export of Tito'’s
Coxrminisa, use Yugoslavia's unique position in Fastern Europe to promote the weakening of the Soviet grip on the
satellite countries."

-~T- POPeGESKE LS
asp el we 2LL6nMe ur Leerary ip
Sires acernssiepies ——
— “SECRET
tisenhower: Papers, 1953-61 | °
(Ann Whitman file) )

a Ae a oS ce ge

 

 

Mr. Allen Dulles pointed out that if this Government undertook to
encourage national Communism, the effect would be very dameging to

the democratic, idealistic, and religious people in the satellites

wno looked to the United States for guidance and ultimate relief.

Mr. Dulles said that he wes not actually opposing a carefully se
lected assistance to national Communist movements by the U. S. in
certain circumstances, but he insisted that such assistance should uo
be carried out very discreetly and perhaps only by covert nééns. |

Secretary Wilson said he strongly disapproved of the whole
idea of support for any natioral Communist movement es set forth in
peregraph 23. Secretary Dulles explained that the object of support{ng in certain instances a nationel Communist movement was simply to
loosen the ties between a satellite and the Soviet Union. Once these
ties were loosened by the development of a national Communist government, it might ultimately be possible to go much further and to
chanse the character of the Comnunist government in the satellites.
de agreed, however, that we should certainly not openly comnit ourselves to a policy of support for national Communist movements in

the satellites.

The Vice President expressed his emphatic agreement with LS
this lest statenent of Secretary Dulles. What it got down to, he
said, wes that we encourage such national Communist movements where
we believe the effect will be to disrupt the tie between the satel
Lite state end the USSR. We certainly do not support such national

Comminist inovements because we approve of naticnal Cosmunism as such.
Actordincly, this paregraph would have to be implemented with the utmost caution. Mr. Allen Dulies then suggested languase for inclusion
in paragraph 23 which he believed would meet the point he had raised
and which hed found general support among the members of the Council.
Secretary Wilson commented that in a kind of a way this was like telling a man how to pley poker and even how to cheat if he doesn't like
one of the players.

The Vice President said he had one other point to add. He
could think, he said, of nothing which would, from the point of view
of domestic politics or of our internetionel relations, be worse than
the occurrence of a leak tending to indicate that we at the highest
izvels were agreeing on a policy for national Communism under any
circunstences. Accordingly, he hoved that everybody, from those a
present all the way down the line, would keep their mouths shut on |
this subject. Secretary Humphrey expressed warm agreement, and wondered whether it wes essential that all these papers had to be passed
all the way down the line. Imagine what would happen if portions of
this paper were ever published in the newspapers. The effect on the
Administration would be murderous. ,

Tne Vice President wondered whether it would be possible
to classify certain portions of the papar as ultra-Top Secret. Mr.
Anderson sugsested that the covering Note by the Executive Secretary
wad EN We 2LoULnower Llorary

Paners, 1953-41 prbrSECRBI

(Ann dhitman file)

Sisenhower:

could call attention to the extreme sensitivity of the contents of
NSc 5608. Under Secretary Hoover, on the other hand, pointed out
that it was inevitable, from the point of view of OCB, that these
policy papers receive a wide circulation. Indeed, copies of them
have to be sent all over the world. Accordingly, it was almost inpossible to preserve absolute secrecy as to any particular portion
of the policy statement. Secretary Humphrey said that in any csse
we should do our best to minimize the risk of a leak, for if one
occurred on this paper it would be the worst we had ever had.

On the same subject, Secretary Dulles pointed out that
NSC 5608 was rather a rarity emong our policy papers, in that in
this paper we vere dealing with /the offensive vis-a-vis the Soviet
bloc, rether than, as usual, de g with the defensive) He agreed
that it would be very dangerous indeed if the contents of the paper
should leak. Asreeing with Secretary Dulles, Secretary Wilson commented edversely on the morel tone which the peper would seen to
give rise to. In turn, Mr. Streibert wondered whether it might not
te possible to work out a more linited distritution for this paper
than the distribution normally given to a volicy paper.

Mr. Anderson said that questions of the security of policy p2arers had often arisen before, and asked if the Council would
not like to hear from the Executive Secretary as to how these matters hed been handled in the past. Mr. Lay pointed out that for
this caper, es for past papers, it was perfectly possible to resort to a very linited and restricted distribution, so that the
precise text would be mown only by the heads of agencies, who
could rass on the required information in some carefully guarded
form. Mr. Lay's remarks prompted the suggestion from Secretary
Heover thet certain sensitive paragraphs in the paver should be
extracted and made the subject of a special annex to NSC 5608.

Secretary Wilson pointed out that it wes, after all, the
resconsidility of officizls in the several departments to carry out
these policies. This did not masn that they hed to pass the policy
carers all over the place. The Defense Department leaked like a
sieve, and Secretary Wilson seid he couldn't seem to stop these
leaxs.

Secretary Dulles indicated that it would be possible to
remove certain sentences and paragraphs and give them a higher
classification, though in general, of course, these papers had to
circulate as guidance for those who were to carry out the policy.
He perscnally favored the susgestion of Under Secretary Hoover
Tor a special annex.

The Nationel Security Council:
PM ee RU OO Livwlary
isenhower: Paners, 1953-61 TOP _SECH!

(Ann Whitman file)

a. Noted and discussed the draft statement of policy contained
~ in NSC 5608, prepered by the NSC Planning Board pursuant to
NSC Action No. 1520-b, in the light of the views of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff transmitted by the reference memoran
dua of July ll.

b. Adopted the statement of policy contained in NSC 5608, subject to the following amendments:

(1) Peregravh 20: Add the following sentence: "In general, however, do not discourege, by public utterances
or otherwise, spontaneous manifestetions of discontent and opposition to the Communist regine, despite
risks to individuels, when their net results will exert pressures for release from Soviet domination."

(2) Paragraph 23, line 2: After the word "satellites", insert the words "es a disruptive device".

[ (3) Peragreph 23, line 3: After the word "basis", insert

the words -<rrfesiiisiiitisiiicc. under appropriate

(4) Paragraph 25: Delete the bracketed phrase and the
footnote relating thereto.

c. Agreed that the NSC Planning Board would delete from the
~  gtatemant of policy in NSC 5608 especially sensitive statements as indiceted in the discussion, and thst such stetements, with the addition of the sentence discussed at the
meeting which would require the authorization of the Secretary of State for certain operations, should be circulated
as a separete Appendix with speciel limited distribution.

NOTE: The statement of volicy in NSC 5608, as amended and edited
in accordance with the actions in b and c above, subse~quently approved by the President subject to the following edditionsl amendments:

Parsgrath 23, lines 3 and 4: Substitute for "'National
Comaunist' movements the words “nationalism in any
form where conducive to ind=pendence from Soviet dom
ination end".

Amend the added sentence referred to in ¢ above to require
the approval of the President as well as the authorization of the Secretary of State for certain operations.

The statement of policy in NSC 5608 as amended, edited,
and epproved by the President, subsequently circulated
as NSC 5608/1 end the Appendix thereto; and referred to

{ the Operations Coordinating Board as the coordinating
agency designated by the President.
