Digital Archive

- digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org
International History Declassified

 

W Wilson
Center
August 07, 1956

Agreed Policy Governing Radio Free Europe Operations

Citation:

“Agreed Policy Governing Radio Free Europe Operations,” August 07, 1956, History and Public Policy
Program Digital Archive, Obtained and contributed to CWIHP by A. Ross Johnson. Cited in his book
Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, CIA mandatory declassification review document number
MORI 1409009.

http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/114692

Summary:

CIA and Free Europe Committee (FEC) restate policy for Radio Free Europe in the context of the
1956 upheaval in the Communist world.

Credits:

This document was made possible with support from the Blavatnik Family Foundation and the Leon
Levy Foundation.

Original Language:

English

Contents:

e Scan of Original Document
{)

.APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2007

w>

MORI DocID: 1409009

7 August 1956

 

Agreed Policy Governing Free Europe Committee Operations

This statement supercedes all previously issued statements of general

policy concerning Free Buropé Conmittee operations.
Apsisnptions : .

In planning exploitation of opportunities which have emerged as a result

of Communist policy shifts, the following is assumed:

A. The denigration of Stalin has created serious difficulties in
Soviet relations with the Satellites; it has raised basic questions as
to the infallibility of Soviet leadership among important elements of
communist parties in the satellite nations: it has aroused to varying
degrees latent aspirations for relaxation of oppression, restoration of ©
national independence, and the establishment of governments responsive
and responsible to popular will.

B. Soviet policy will continue to follow a line of limited relaxation of coercive techniques of control in the satellites, while stil.
endeavoring to maintain effective domination of these countries, This
relaxation may extend even to the satellite nations being permitted to
follow certain independent lines of national action om issues which are
not estimated by the Kremlin as dangerous to real Soviet controls.

C. Soviet policy will continue to permit growing contact betwean
the satellites and the Free World, in effect partially lifting the Iron
Curtain, but not to the extent thet the Kremlin considers any important
element of its power 1s threatened. |

D. Even though the Kremlin is assumed to intend retaining real
control over the satellites, recent more flexible policies have set in
motion certain sociel and political trends toward independence, personal
freedom, and representative governments which may prove irrewrsibdlie
short of forcible repression. Satellite leadership, especially in
Poland and Czechoslovakia, has been shaken. Many prominent individuals .
have been down-graded. The positions of others are imperiled, These
trends lend themselves to encouragement and developeanent in directions
favorable to U.S. long-term interests. .

E. Yugoslavia will insist upon remaining an independent political
power though allied to the Soviet Union for the pursuit of sperific
political and ideological objectives. In ite strategic or lonz-term
aims it will be the partner of the Soviet Union. Its tactical practices
in central and eastern Europe will vary from country to comtry, conditionad to some extent by the degree of geographic proximity. In the
captive nations nearest Yugoslavia its tactical aims will appear to be
parallel to those of the U.S. Government up to the point where "liberalization” in a given country exceeds that in Yugoslavia itself.

%* PEC efforts are currently directed primarily toward Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,

Hungary, Poland and Rumania; to a lesser extent toward Albania, Estonis, Latvia and
Lithuania; and in Free World areas where exiles from the above countries are assisted

in working toward agreed-upon objectives.

FEC is presently developing "country plans” which will define its policy and

operational objectives in each country and in the Free World generally.

U

 
MORI DocID: 1409009

 

II Discussion:

Under Stalin, Soviet policies in the satellite nations were based on total
Soviet domination echieved through coercive police-state measures. After the
death of Stalin there was a brief period in 1953-1954, referred to es the "new
course”, during which the people in the satellite nations were given some temporary
relief, at least in the economic field. However, it was not until the 20th Congrees of the CPSU that policies were set in motion which have much greater significance for the way of tife in the satellite nations. At the Congress the
leaders of the Praesidium (Politburo) at least in word, gave their approval to
differing roads to Socialism, to the establishment of popular fronts, and even
to parliamentary forms of government. The Belgrade declaration of Messrs.
Bulgenin and Tito was blessed by the Congress, and national communism thereby
appeared to became an alternative to which the satellite nations might aspire.
Most important of all. was the denigration of Stalin with all of its far-reaching
implications, especially in ita impact on the satellites.

As @ result of the foregoing developments, unrest in varying degrees has
begun to appear in the satellite nations. As far as the majority of the people
are concerned, however, thezve bas not been any significant improvement of their
lot or change of their basically anti-commmist, antl-regime attitude. Collectivization of the farms and priority for the development of heavy industries are
still the stated basic policies of theix governments ({t should be pointed -out
hovever that the vegimes appear to have been frightened into promises of transfer
of investment from heavy industry to light industry and agriculture as the result
of internal economic pressures in Foland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia. It is
also pointed out that kulaks and other private farm owners are currently being
referred to with greater tolerance, especially in Poland and Hungary}. There
hes been some surface relief as a result of diminishing interference dy the
police, some improvements in working conditions, less propagenda, and more
opportunity for real amusement in the various cultural outlets such as radio,
books, films, newspapers, etc.

The important change has been within the commmist parties. Urquestionably
a substantiel number of communists have been deeply affected by the denig:-ation
of Stalin and the recognition that mich of what he stood for was wreng. The
denigration of Stalin also provides satellite communists with the recognition
that Moscow leadership is not infallible and, in fact, can be very barnful.
Many commmists, particularly the youth, have become disillusioned. There is
evidence of @ significant struggie in the satellites between those communists
whose major loyalty is to Moscow and who therefore don't want Liberalization
to go too fast and gt aut of control, and those ccoummists who are primarily
loyal to theix own national interests and who therefore want the "thaw" to
proceed at a more rapid pace.

The developing ferment within the communist parties has been piirticularly
noticeable among the youth and intellectuals. It has manifested itself in many
ways, including outright ettacks on the Soviet Union. The thaw has pone furthest
and the agitation has become most apparent in Poland, which has always resisted
Soviet domination more than the other satellites. East Germeny, Czechoslovakia
and Kungery aiso heve.a growing degree of unrest. There is & chunge in Rumania,
Bulgaria, and Albania, but there have not been splits of such appsrent depth
within the perties in these countries. Stalinist controls at this uriting
appear to remain mst firm in East Germany. Although Rakosi has been removed
from his position in Hungery, he appears to have been succeeded by another
Stelinist.
MORI DocID: 1409009

In eum, for reasons of internal Soviet. necessity, a pact was made with Tito
at Belgrade in May-Jiume 1955. That pact contained a declaration to the effect
that each country was entitled, without interference, to erect its own political
and social institutions; specifically to follow its own road to “socialism.” As
@ consequence, Moscow began this year to permit each “satellite” Party and regime
an increased measure of autonomy, along the lines of “liberalization” pranised
the Soviet peoples by the 20th Congress CPSU. Under pressure from Tito, but also
under popular pressure "from below” heads began to fall. Where leaders have disappeared they have not, however, been eucceeded in the highest post by leaders of
the anti-Staelinist opposition but by their own subordinates, e.g. Ochab in Poland,
Gero in Hungary, Yugov in Bulgaria. This situation is still in flux. Nowhere
bas a true anti-Stalinist opposition come to power. But ve bave seen for the
first time, instead of a mute national opposition, the emergence of clusters of
concerted opponents, a series of “professional elites” speaking out and taking
action in several countries. They speak within the framework of State-created
organizations; but it is certain that many are at heart anti-commmist and it
would appear that we must look to these elites and not only to the broad popular
opposition to force further concessions and reforms upon their governors.

The other important change is the fact that the Iron Curtain has been
partially raised. There is growing official contact. between the satellite governments end Free World governments. The exchange of persons in all fields includ. |
ing scientists, students, sports teams, cultural groups, etc., has increased
Significantly. Filmes from the Free World are being shown again on @ limited
pasis; western periodicals and some newspapers can be purchased openly on the
nevsstands in some satellite cities; arrangements are being made for the exchange
of some radio and television programs; tourism bas returned for the first time
Since the Iron Curtain was created, and this summer private satellite citizens
will be able to travel to certain Western Suropean countries. A large selection
of western books is again on the shelves of libraries, arcessil:le to any citizen.
The western nations are now participating in several trade fairs in Satellite
Europe. East-West trade has expanded 35% during the pest year. Even some of
the physical manifestations of the Iron Curtain have been removed along the
Austro-Hungarian border where barbed wire, mines, and watch towers heve been
removed, though the barriers may merely have been moved farther back into
Hungary, or may be of a different and less conspicuous nature.

The increasing East-West contacts will probably have much more negative
impact on the Bast European exiles than they will on the people behind the
Iron Curtain. Most of the political exiles have kept well abreat of the times
and abandoned long ago their earlier hopes of liberation by war. ‘The more
flexible and responsible of them see real opportunity for positive action
through East-West contacts.

Since political warfare depends upon contact with the enemy, there is now
@ real opportunity to wage it in the satellites. This opportunity is the more
exploitable because of the many indications that events in the sateliites are
moving more rapidly than the leaders expected or were fully prepared to cope
with.

III. Obdjectives:

A. Strategic

il. To conduct U.S. political warfare in such a wey as to induce the
people and elites of the captive nations to favor the adoption of the following
national goals: —__

@. FPreedom from Soviet control over internal effairs.
MORI DocID: 1409009

A

‘tb. Freedom from Soviet control in external affairs to the practicable extent that it can be brought about by neutralization on the Austrian
or Pinnish model, with the concomitant withdrawal of the captive nations
from the Warsew Pact and from CEMA which today hold those nations militarily and economically in the Soviet Orbit.

ec. Freedom to negotiate the formation of non-military regional
agreements or federations end eventually, either directly or through
regional wits, to negotiate entry into all-European non-military organizations or into an all-European federation or confederation.

2. To take full propaganda advantage of the Belgrade Principle which
recites that "questions of internal organization or differences in social
systems...are solely the concern of the individual countries” and to refrain
from identifying this goal as "Titoism" or "national cammmiam" or by any
other restrictive label.

3. To ensure that the Yugoslav model shall not be deemed a model with
which the captive peoples can rest content for themselves, by refraining
from acts and words which would encourage contentment therewith; end, further,
to deal in the same way with the idea of "national commmism”™ in order that
the glitter of the adjective should not blind peoples and elites to the harsh
realities contained in the noun.

h, To satisfy the yearning of every captive people, and particularly of
its elites, for the full resumption of its historic ties with the culture
and civilization of the West by carrying on an appropriate program of East~
West contacts with those peoples.

5. To conduct our political warfare in such ea way as to contribute
to the establishment of democratic institutions in the captive nations and
the satisfaction of essential, liberties for the individual and the nation,
. among them the following:

e. A constitutional government allowing for non-ccamunist parties, ©
free clections by secret ballot, free parliamentary debate, and effective local bodies and institutions, and in independent judiciary.

bv. True equality of opportunity by elimination of class warfare
and removal of handicaps due to “class origin," religion, and individval
opinion on social and political affairs.

c. Freedom of intellectual inquiry and expression.

ad. Freedom of thought, expression, assembly, worship, press and
the other components of a democratic bill of rights.

e. Freedom for the peasant population to base its existence upon
the three pillars of peasant life: property, the family, religion.

f. True democratic trade uious organized and administered in the
interest of the worker and not of the state-capitalist emplorrer.

g Freedom of enterprise for those who seek to be self-employed,
including the artisen, the shopkeeper, and the practitioner of the
liberal professions.

h. Freedom of: internal movement and communications.

™
MORI DocID: 1409009

 

i. Freecom of commmicetion with the non-comunist world.
B. Tactical

1. To encourage liberalization of institutions and decentralization
of authority and decision-making power to the point where a return to Stalinist
measures will be politically impracticable for regime or party leaders.

2. To continue cross-reporting of the progress of anti-Stalinism and
demands for liberalization in the several captive nations.

3. To continue, specifically, moral support for individual peasant
proprietorship, free trade unionism, self-employment, private professional
practice, and other democratic demands being currently made by economic
and intellectual groups in the captive nations.

hk, fo encourage autonomy of local political councils and to guide
them by describing local government in the United States and other Tree nations.

5. To report all Yugoslav manifestations which contribute to the embarrass~
ment of Stalinisets in power and to the withdrawal of Stalinist leederse as a
means toverds further attenuation of commmism in order that democratic insti-~tutions may eventually become fully operative. |

6 Bearing in mind the importance lent by the Praesidium of the CPSU to
its campaign for transition to “socialism” in the free world by non-violent
means; and

Remembering the role voluntarily assumed by Tito as principal ogent
of the new Soviet-Yugoslav partnership in the luring of social democrats into @ communist~-socialist alliance against the capitalist democracies; and

Considering that the taske cf construction and reconstruction in
the captive countries present problems of such magnitude as to make government leedership and direction inevitable-
a. To take all possible measures to make the captive peoplis avare
of the facts about the new capitalism (in American and elsewhe-7e) snd
perticulearly the extent to which the fruits of enterprise are shared
between owners, management, workers, goverment and the consumr, ard
the ways in which its concern for the welfare of the community is
manifested.

b. To show clearly that a new non-doctrinaire concept of socialism
is guiding the social democratic parties of the free world, prompted
by emphasis on the welfare and dignity of the vorker instead of emphasis
on out-dated dogmas, both in the Scandinavian countries and eliewhere in
Burope.

ec. To display thet there bas been an interpenetration of :apitelist
and socialist ideas, and that both the new capitaliom and the new socialism seek to safeguard the liberties while promoting the welfare of the
individual in the free comunity.

7. To discredit membership in CEMA by showing that it means:

a, Redicel impossibi1i} yas. following a national economic path
because 1t makes the natio. economy, in its structure and gouwls, its

 
: ; MORI DocID: 1409009

__ SEGRE; —_
aay Awe

oveartiimities aid vewords Tov tre ceebbyicboass. cong. Gee Sage hor, pubes haan
io Sowiek Pucsia’s ideolery, plans and ambitioes.

». Continued employment of an excessive peas os the nebiansl ianpower and resources for military ends, thus presslug dow the standard
of Living.

e. Exploitation of the natidomed wanpower gid regnurces in tie
tmterest of Soviet Russia's camoaion of "economic ecupetdon” wich tos
Vest by which the captive peoples are deprived of the beonmePie: wees
gfole Fram their own industrializetion and ave forescd to sell sbrogd at
@ loss in order to further Soviet miugesials nolevical. oumasrs

ad. An artificial barrier to the tradibicnal ond oratitalie
economic relations of the esptive peoples with one Pree nabiers at
Burope and the other continents, ond to direct unrestricted sources

of essential supplies avallable in the free world.

e. A barrier to icembership ai the ceptive peoples dm the dtr.
Kurogean economic orgenizations CoREC, XPU,_ CAS, Suratom...j, or essoot ton with those organisations fran whieh vwesterm Europe ras
niready profited 62 greatiy in its persistent, efforin to create a
coupon Buropean mri 3.
G. To Aiseredit membershin in the Versaw Pact by showhag thea. sub
wl “ure soe of the nations? armed lorees to the Cenezual Steff ot Moscow Les

@. False to the netional sentinent because tha pecqube wd thee
sono @o not wish Go deYend Soviet Nussia but only to der ond een Cay?
wountry.

nen A degrading colonial status eavivedlent to hhet from vchder che
foreee of Indie (for oxampls) wore velessed ‘by the Britdsh Go-erncen's,

e, fy: @ver-present threat of hetag drewn into Loces. or sanere?
way by Sowiet Russia and in the sole Interest of Soviet Russi.

a. A mterial burden pressing upon the netigmal svandan! of
living which could be greatiy lightened b v independence Yrowm she Soviet
iiion because it is se.f-evident that ao Vestern power threatens the
independence of the captive nations.

2, @o promote the idea of future Integration tn & Burcseen poLitecwd
aa ecomonic community es a peaceful crjective which vould lead to bvenufieiel
ctiel pnd economic results.

10. To wee available radio fecliicties and purveyors of the weinvad word.

( jucluding aivborne leaflets ain mai tics pro, jects} ag thamtels tor comhact

by tha captive peoples with vestern culture, oclencs ead the mabe +; and, Lurihex.
a3 means through which to satisfy the huager to Lear shout 7 » de we Litions
coustantly reported from the captive nebions.

Ll, To enlist Important opinion moulders (governmental end ornivete } in
the Tree vorld in support of the above strategic and tactical shjestives,
These should Include political ‘Lenders, leaders of trede unions, iiybexne+tors.
orvanizeationa, religious, fart, Givie, youth, vowen'’s groupe: ccmmamdteat tons
MORI DocID: 1409009

 

media; journaliste and others.

Opemetlomel Sages 3

1. The Free Europe Committee (Radio Free Europe, the Free Europe Press
and the Free Europe Exile Relations Division) should continue to intensity its
activities with respect to all listed objectives.

2. More specifically, the Free Europe Camittee should:

@. Continue reifio broadcasts to the Satellites as long as essential
liberties and democratic institutions {set forth in IIT Objectives, above)
are denied its peoples by the Soviet Uhion and its controlled rugimas.

bd. Continues to drop leaflets by balloon until free and uncensored
entzy of printed matter is assured.

c, Continue mailing projects to specially selected groups of regine
and Party fimetionaries, members of professional, managerial ami intellectual
bodies, and others anong whom the new elites of the national opposition are
to be found. :

a. Continue its distribution of the xhruahchev “secret speech” in
the languages of the captive nations, both in those cowmtries and in sxcile
circles, including refugee canps and settlements.

e. Continue and increase activities utilising responsible exile
organizations and individuals whe can contribute to the objectives of this
Plan. It sbould work tovard broadening the base of exile understanding
ani responsibility in sdopting more flexible attitudes toward the opportunities presented by the present political relacation in the satellites
end encourage exile initiative in seizing these opportimitics.

Y. Continue its operations to counter the commmist campaign to
penetrate, munipulate, fragment, and subvert the various Bast European
emigrations, and be sensitive to new opportumities to do so.

@. Continue to use outetanding exiles to seize opportunities ta
debate commmist satellite officials on such issues as the degree of
Boviet control and the remaining menifestations of Stalinism in their
countries. It should seek these ayportunities wherever neutralist arene
may be affected. Ti should create opportunities for such debates whenover pervticular everts such as the Poxunen riots cccur.

h, Utilize outstanding and appropriately selected exile leaders
in the underdeveloped areas of the world, including Iatin America , to
explein the nature of Soviet colonialism end to give ayewltness accounte
of the techniques which the Soviets use to take over control of another
country. Similarily, such exiles should attend international meetings,
should participate fn international organizations, should write articles
in publications and otherwise attempt to influence importent opinion
moulders toward the above objectives.

4. Continue its preparation of handbooks on the coumtries of its
interest for distribution to rican groups end tourists preparing to
visit the captive nations and 2dr'everitual translation into appropriate
languages and use by others after further exploration of this ratter.

 
MORI DocliD: 1409009

 

Carefully selected individuals should, vith the approval. of the DepartState, establish social and other informal contact with satellite diplothe Free World.

4k. Consideration should be given to inspiring and subsidizing travel to
and from the satellite nations for the purpose of carrying out the objectives
in this plan.

5. Consideretion should be given to subsidizing the development of zreater
circulation of selected Western books, newspapers, and periodicals in the
satellite nations.

6, Meetings and congresses both in Western Europe and satellite nations,
can be influenced to our advantage. For axvemple, a congress of writers could
have considerable political potential.

7. Influence should be establiahed in various international. orgenizations
where satellite officials work with weatern governments on substantive matters,
such as the Economic Commission for Europe in Genova.

8. Where contact existe with eatellite officials, an effort should be made
to assist the expansion of Yugoelav influence in the satellites so long a3 a
closer relationship between satellites and Yugoslevs can be used to weekas Soviat
control of the satellites. On the other hand, efforts should be mie emong
Yugoslav government officials to sharpen their appreciation of all emerging
differences between Yugoslavia and the U5SR. JsSocialists friendly tio the
“committed” areas, f.e., NATO coumtries, etc. should be used to accuse Yugoslavia
Of becoming @ tool of the USER, thus pressing Yugoslevis to demonstrate more
clearly that it is not.

cE
BARS

 
