Diary | page 2

, , ‘In ‘the iusugasitian custems house the situation is chaotic.
‘the "Freedom Fixghters" are in full command and yet there’s reaily
me one in charge. The Comzuniet gnafts have either fled or * :
‘been locked Ups Border patrole have been abandoned. Ali Crnae:
‘and hammer and sickle eigns have been torn down. Freedom Fighters
have ripped the red stare and other army insignia from their
“wniforms and each wears a tiny bit of the red-chite-green cloth

in ite place, pinned te his cap or Lapel All the rebele are arnecd,
saying that they got their weapons from ermy and police areenais.
ie oa. of us, as westerners, are more than welcome. *Come
on in,* we are told. “Come see what we are doing and tell the
world. But we need help. hen is help coming ? Food and nadie tone.
‘There are thousands of dead and dying. Medicines and blood. ..

Ce ea Ag we ourselves hardly know what's going on, our ansvers
. non—committal. But help is coming. Alreedy, Red Cress trucks
‘and ambulances are coming in frem Vienna, laden with supplies.
They are waved through. both the border berriers and their loads
‘then transferred at the Hungarian customs house to Hungarian trucks.
be as the evening wears on the Hungarian vehicles coms over
to the Austrian side to load up. Their drivers are unshaven ané
red~eyed. gome haven’t slept in two or three days. They erowd into
‘the tiny Gas thaus for a sandwich, coffee or a echnaps. and _ we
orowd around then seeking information. But it’s a 50-80 dination,
for the Hungarians are as -onerr for news from us as we are for
information from thea. 2

i & handful of Freedom Fighters are dzunk, but it’e a
combination of happiness and alcohol. And there are a few who are
bitter. “Where the hell’s your help. fest 7 where are your tanks
iat: pena Tee ee meppeser to beat the Rusefans all by eur— =
selves? }

“>
hh aahee ae pean. 3

: ‘There's no answer to this one. Pood and medicine, yer. ‘ut
tanks ‘and planes...
hae ‘We work most of the night, phoning Vienna as we get sone
‘taing new, About an hour’s sleep in the car.

 

: i & day of interviewing and phoning. Our orders forbid us to
go : inte gees sO we sust be content with talking toe truek érivere
and Freedon Fighters at the two customs houses. ‘There ere rumors
of a thousané things, but they are difficult te pin down. Com
munications are all but non-existent inside Hungary ec that the
people in Hegyeshalon don’t know for aure what’s going on in other
parte ef the country. 7
4 I see the firat buses and trucks from Budapest, out to pick
up supplies, and their drivers report heavy fighting in the
capital Gity. They say the Hungarian army io deserting wholesale
to the rebele and the Revolution ie pieking up momentum everywhere.

7 pe Aid is picking up, too, and vehicles are now pouring into
‘Wekelsdort form all-over Avstria. Aakery sends dewn three
of ite trucks loaded with bread. #e hear of drug firms cleaning
their shelves. And private citizens are emptying their pantrys
and medicine closets.

ee peta ete But conspicuously ehieeens the Armericane. ‘where is eur aid:
rhe | ‘Unites States Eocapee Program and the woluntary ehureh agencies ?
The Embassy in Vienna ?
| Le = ¢ anet turn away from pong ty Austrian as well ee Hungarian,
when naked thie question.
ae We wpend the night, without thoughts of sleep, helping
‘unload. and load trucks at the Hungarian eustoms boue®. Te almost
forget that we are supposed to be reporters and that thie ie a news

storys Tt*a eo much mere tran trates
maa ! ve | page 4

be There are vehicles by the hundreds, now, - webihing te. tone
relief aeneneee beck inte Itongary.

 

fenting to see border potats ether than HekeledorfHegyeshalom, we head south toward Sopren, checking the situation
pare 3 sige: ‘Gt sind: Sach suiting, senhditinn talk wihtihiene, 5%
4e hard to remain dry-eyed watehing the Austrians anf their oi4
7 the Hungarians. canes wagons, bicyeles and rucksacks are
crammed full or pilea@ high with foodatuffs end medicine. The
sh eahiacind is a Dlack—shawled peasant women, easily 75, walking a
mile to get to the Mungarian berger berrier, where sh® hands over
EE PRNNEE: IE A TE OE nee ENS And then
shuffles back the mile again to Austrian territory. —
| At the @pron customs house, I esk o terman woman from
wuntoh what persuaded her end her husbend to drive some 300 niles
to bring medical supplies, °We visited Hungary ense before the
war," she saié, *an@ et so many lovely pecple.* Aa we talked,
she ateod there ankie-desp in mud, with = poeile on = leash and
‘with teare ramming dom ber fae.
| 3 I interviewed « borter guarf whe had deserted te tne
Fedele, dut he wee not very friendly er cooperative. I suspected
him of being am oppertunist who hed perhaps swung ever te save his
neck. Then he sai@ simply ond without éramatioss
|  *T nave Lived under the Russians for 10 years. Sow we hare
driven then out. We will never let them back again. fe *il1 all
gs | :

Heting hip eel4, dark eyee and the machine piste] slung
over his shoulder, I felt sorry fer any Miesion thet might nove day

dee thi: aininn Winelht Stibeg: Winans

 
pa ORE ¥: im: page 5

| : =

=.

ra Another long evening on the border — and embarassrent
- piled on exbarrasenent at the lack of a single American, either
with two legs or four whesle, there te help. Ati mid~aignt
long-distance and enstional phone calle to Bubaney and Coneular
fritads in Vieuna ent Sqlsburg saking where Dlccd-denors or food
cuppliers might be. ‘eh Se moe wt Stith Me ertonn
Ambassador has forbidden any exployee (or hte wife)
or contribute so much as a cingie can-of Hains woup,

i Nk I am wung owt, and for the first tise im ny Life, ashaned
of: ay preenh patepert There gan’t be political implications that
prevent a person from giving @ pint ef bleed! 
 

pg “ty niente, oth Mangarien and imateien resteietions have
been lifted and the prese corps pours into Bengary. ‘only oe of
RPE are left in Meketetort and our only ‘abject: heme see
are & few Austrian cuntenn men and the Ceotheus omer. :
ea te return to Yieuna to plea for persti ae te > au.
Tan" this the moment that see: opectatiys Yo ae we wk for

 

  
  

the vous Tien down from munich te ete for hineelf ant *y
noon be gives approval. We oun go int uke.

Pour teams are made up, wine consisting of the group that
has been working together for the past several days: Gabor
Tormay, our Rungarian RFE interviewer in Vienna; Jerry Ponikiewski,
our Polish jack-cf-all-trades, whe knows sore about Mungary than
most Hungarians; Kurt Xofron, a German from the Siddeuteche RundCents whe will anke tagho Sie fen sn ‘Spbegh Soe, Wepmpelrtadsons
and myself. —
    

more than atequnts éovitage. we are te ge int : ‘
en area untouched by ether newannn. ae

A dienppetataont thet Dedaysot tn “Af Lintte,” at we
sen'} Stay wo quite, Me bey 12 artes of 8 wi

 

 

on the western side ter slnest sight yeune’ on ton
whe fled through varbed wire and sinco and yest patrols and uss.

hunting 4eg8.«<
Ourw is 0 waits and silent ride oo we travel over an

exeelient reed in the guthering dusk. X am surprised that the road
1s se geed ant cencinde to the dotrinent of the Busiane that they
Sent: Gest. Sine 000 Sena me Banc Yass we

‘mere is ‘tee ain, oui ines ‘Gm war een thoughte.
Tt ie ciftieuhs far mp te penesher letey want 1 mas thtaking:
*fe thie is uhat it’s AR oss ay fo Zee
years of writing wad taining stout muesen

 

 
   
Diary re at ae ae

there 10 4 Preston Fighter roaibiees St Hegytshalen, but
we are waved through when we show the Amerioan flag. There
are buses and trveks, e@vilien ani aray, everywhere, but they
are all in “friendly hanés.* People are waving o21 aleng tho

: fe are stopped again in Beson Magyarevar, where ve ask for
the location ef the aesencre that took place there on October 25.
ER SE IRE aa Oe POY mere Ser 80
delegated te be our guide.

Ke are told hew, on the 25th, 600 people marehed out
te the AYH )seoret police) hesdquarters for no other purpose than —
to aek for renevel ef the huge red star on the side of the
wailding. As the erond got mearer, a frantie AVE officer gave the
erter te shoot ant machine guns fired inte the anarwed marchers.
People turned and fleé@ in pante but the shooting continued.
fand-grenaédes vere threwn frem the secent—etory windows end added
to the casualties, RBighty~twe were riled, indluding women and
children, and some 160 wounded. A woman who lfved in a house
100 yarde away care out to inventigate the noise and she, too,
was mowed down, along with the baby ehe held im her arus.

_s«sTt de « eebering and shuddering experience being shown
areund the area where this slaughter took please. A soldier, who
defected to the rebela, then tells us that the lientenant whe gare
the order to fire was hung that same night by infuriated villagers.
The captain of the barracks ia reported as having fied in eivilian
dieguise te Cxechesloveria.

We take a few pitteres cf the reé ster — thich ms
There is only one hotel, the name of which is at the
monent uncertain. Referee the Communist regine it vas the Hote)
Diary , page &

&eynle. Then it became the ted Star (VYSr6ea Cadilleg). Eut several
days ago the Rea Star sign was torn down and west peeple are
referring te it ag the foyale senin.

The lobby ia full and hub-duebbing. We Rave to wait i:
line before we oan get reems, ansigned to us by a young desk clerk
who is cieepiane bet harpy ta see so aia vesterners. "1 am
sorry for my bad English,” he apologizes te ue, “but I haven't
had much practice recently."

The rest of the evening is apent interviewing and

writing up notes.

 

Our firet taek ts to get an interview with Atti le
Seigethy, who is head of the Oytr — ané franetanubian area —
ational Council. The Town Hill ie right across the street from our
hotel windew, a large and ornate building, but dirty ané@ graylooking in the cold OQetober weether. Scores of people are tryixng to
ret in the front entrance, where uniformed and armed guards are
cheeking identity documents. Our western ones get us in immediately.

, Directed upstairs, the way is wide open to us as forvign

HRSEMEN. Actually, $00 many people are too eager to help, or at
least too eager te talx to us. In fact, there are altogether too
many people all over the place. There ia bedlam is one after
another of the reows into which we are shown, Purniture is @iearranged ; what were onoe probably files are mew corners piled high
with papers; telephones are jangling conetently;: and the bdable
of voices is cverwhelaing.

tt. ie Aateiowk? 06 tne anyone ta charges Seeres of
people come forward with cffere te help, but more often tuan not they
represent some particular group sr have a persenal exe te grind.
Their eagerness to talk te someone feem the West is almost pathetic.
Frefessors, tactery workers, ptudeatn, deat siineem, fener oounts
and countesses, they ell cons forvard with sone program or plan.
It 1a obvious that they have been mute oo long that they cannot

att, fo atk ong shal eh. on tn alipal tener tome.

   

= tiny lt onan cant np
Sent is WAS) tet eo ld You ste, we have eo much more important
wort te de wat we havent had tine to tke mis towne

| granted an interview «ith asigetny. ie is

a stont man in his Fiftten, shone sot Metingstching feature is

 

great walrus austache. Mie drees stents gut in the srowdy @ midnight —

blue double—vreanted enit and what almont looks Like on oxford
button-down shirt without the butten-downs. Tut he te dead tired
and seens bewildered by his mdden prominence. Meveral groupe of
newsmen have preceded us, others join us during Gir interview and we
heard lnter that still aere cane to sev him. Tt fan’t unreasonable
DEMERS ROE RA REA gpm hag, ues: gigs re ganas
©, SARNENTES NE AGRE CEES CNNEES * mene! Cay

Seigethy identified himself as 1 eesiarune of om Ragy
ana eaid that he agreed that Mungary showld pave free elections and
iumediate witnérensl of the Russians. But he hesitated on the political future of the country, eventually saying thet s “Gemulka-type*
government seened the most likely to sucosed. | ,

42. ge RL, the Untervien wae not very ouceessful, both
because of the almost interminable interruptions and the interpreting
4ifficvities. But the main réasen wae undoubtedly Saigethy’s own
vagueness. nae ve

i
Te then visited the leeal hespitel te see hewwstern
medicines were being Gistributed, I¢ was @ large, new bullding ané
spetlessly eleam. Seqngity desteae, SRA MyPEND wee glad vo

 

she was lovely and stared at ue with batght, leur eyes. Ghe was shot
in the spine with a Gubdam Dulles ent 28 had eque Gut her stenneh,
Seking all her intestines with 2%,
“She will ¢ie in « few hours,®
te were chats ty the ihe we teres
but cans on Santa bh SEE ON

B. ~
Wad

i "

Th... ad
ame

"

~ stete®

- - ol ot » a“
‘

 
 
   
   
 

Hereioedert +e

 

soca’ have sonnin wesiiditain Witenes i
but this city of 60000 denmet bepeetititp Siseh anh Geprencing. me
city is spread out for suout five mailed su Sauk aide Of Whe atnding
one deep on cach aiée of the read, sith a6 apparent center of the city
er main shopping district. fhe phrase fe @ widteulous one < uain
chopping @istriet. We sew Little bat esnl aines.
4 phere eal) hat preceded us and we were expected. Fe vent
Diary page 11

immediately te Eational Ceuncil headquarters, new heused in what

had previously been the Communist Party HQ. The building was spacious—
recently painted and somewhat resembled an Austrian villa. [It stocd
out in its surrounding like the Linceln Memorial in the middie of s
slum.

Inside a seene of total disarray. Everything “Communist” hac
been tossed in corners and piled high all around — beeks, papers,
literature of all kinds, phenograph reeords, statucttes, ete. "Take
a souvenir, if you like,” we were told. *I%’s all junk.*

A Gesen officials crowied sround use and led us up into
the ex-bess’s office on the second fleer., It was a luxurious roon,
with wall—to—wall carpeting, a great maple desk and a conference
teble and lieather-covered doors. We asked for a descripticn of the
ouated CP chief, but our hosts laughed.

"Ye enly saw him once in three years, at a Party meeting.

We don’t even know his nese. He one knows where he lived or whether
he was married or single. But he 414 drive a big Mereedes car and
we found his salary book in his desk: he earned 28,000 ferint a month
(a skilled werker made from 1,200 to 1,400)."

The nameless Party ohief had disappeared in the first hours
of the uprising, but no-one knew where to, or cared.

We were with the Hatienal Council peeple for mere than two x=:
hours ané histened to excited talk about a new Rungary and worker
eelidarity. there was some disunity about what the future zight
tring, but there was absolute uneninity in the greup’s hatred of the

Before we left we pledged te take a message te the Forld
fraées Union on Bungerian worker opposition te the Seviete and
protesting egainst their presence in Hungary.

fe were then asked te go te the leeal rafic station to
wroadeast brief neassages to the loeal population. We were telé that
we were the first westerners to visit Tatadanya in years end that
what we had to say would be a moral boost to the people. We said
our few ineffectual words ina prone Bape etudip, but ‘the station
ena, tad as we spoke. So did we, . slashes: ee a
Hoping to meet and talk with miners, we went to & eal
antenp! deftes, hovntip. pub Of the, ten in. bom, | (Me nade taye interviows
with several old sen, but then made the “nistake* ef bringing out
our chocolate bars. The coffee house was swamped in a matter of
minutes, Afraid of some real damage to the premives, we moved out
into the etreet, but that was even worse, We had started by giving
the bare to children aly, but seem grown-ups were begging for then, too.
fe were mon from Mars, but it was not much fun being from
sigan Jaane: There was an uncomfortable edge in the Hungarians
veing s0 Sesperately poor. fe were almost glad to get away.
| wlow, dork and snowy ride back to Gytr. We saw « Russian
Zis Limousine anashed against a tree along side the read, but it «as
empty end stripped of ali its equipment. And then we saw a convoy
of American ears pase us going in the direction of Budapest.
The significance of the convoy didn’t come theugh to us
until we got back to the hotel. A BBC man told us that he had been
etopped by Russian tanks at Magyarovar on the way out te Vienna.
Others in the hotel reported similar experiences. fhe American
convoy had else been turned back, = a inte
When I phoned pnccngh 40. ome. sabioe. hak ionadia k bed to
eay that it looked as theugh the Buesians ha4 cut us off. But the
redio was still breadeasting about the Soviet withdrawal, so we
weren’t too concerned,

3 y sae i 3 sh cake |

| Our firet real day “impriconed.* And yet no comprehension
of what it might mean or lead te. We wy ond the day interviewing and
talking to people. Ruasian tank movements through GySr, beth to ané
Diary page 15

from the border, scause much speculation and rumor, out the Russians
continue to. announce that the tanks are «erely for the protection

of Russian Sttgnkiiin: poxneneat who will be evacuated. It is probably
the desire to believe this which leads the Rungarians and us to
centinue our work, the former trying to dring order out of revolutionrn
chaos an4 we trying to report on it.

At our request, a “press room" hae been made available to
ws in the former Chamber of Commerce building whieh is now the AC
of the Revolutionary Ceuneil. All arranged by Gabor, the former
hotel pportier who had once been a bright young university graiuate
with a promising future. But hia orientation and sympathies were
too western, and he wan reduced to portering. fhe Revolution gave
nis mes chance and his language talents brought him the job as
peens. while? He is humble about it, But you can see that he’s proud
and happy: And he’s pathetically eager to help. 7

Although there is vo phone in the room — the thing we .
needa most -~ there is an encrmous combination radio—phonograph-tape
recorder that somehow symbolizes "prese." Her are there any
typewriters, Dut we have eur own. We ask for paper and get printed
sheets of Communist directives — but the back sides are blank and
ean serve for typing noten. "7 *_ terribly eorry," says Gabor, “but
Bi guess we're not very well organized yet.* The understatement
ef the year but we vastly appreciate the thought.

| At another meeting with fationel Couneil chairman Saige thy
we ask whether there isn’t some way we ¢an ve allowed te leare;
mightn’t he give us a Hungarian éceument that would get us through
the Russian read blocks? Again, confusion end embarrassment fron
thie former regime official, swept up in the Kevolution. He would
Like to help usa, but knows he is helpless until the Ruesians make
their intentions clear. ) ,

A group of frustrated English newsmen decide not to wait
any Longer and take off again for Budapest, from whence they ad
Diary page 14

come the day before. ight others, ineluding the three of us from
RFE for whos Budapest is cut-of-bdeunda, eeuaka: tix the hetel.

At 11:00 pem. I gat a phone call through to Viene for
what eventually proves to be the lact time. Our people there tell
us not to worry, that they’ll get un out "somehow." Yorry is the
Least of our pasttines; we’re 20 busy collecting and writing up
information that we’ve hardly thought of our predicament. As
I'm talking om the phone, « column of 11 Rusefian tanke rumbles
by outside the window and as a joke I put the reeeiver outside for
the Yabirma reople to listen. The tanks continue on toward the
horder, }

fhat night in eur room we discuss the situation, but «till
feel that we’re in a good position to report on what ia going on.
In ded by 01:30 and a sound sleep.

 

We are all awakened at 05:45 by the clanking and roar
of Russian tanks and other heavy vehicles, Heneath our ‘vindows
mile-long columns pages by, dut unlike those of past days, these
disperse throughout the city. One croup of tanke turna left over
the bridge to the railroad station, ancther deploys at all four
corners of the Tren Hall, scorss form our hctel., Tanks and connone
take up positions at a11 street intersections.

fe ali realise it without saying ite Gytr hes been
eceupied. |

A mix ure of feelings, atending at the scindows in our
pajammas, watching thie parade of sight. at first cold anger at
thie betrayel. Then i find ayself muttering the vorst obcenitics.
An@ waiting jumpily for the sounds cf shooting.

Gne in guilty, too, of thoughte of self-preservution:
what should we do? Puck our »age? Go back to bed? fum for it? Tare

a bath?
Diary page 13

Anether first reactien is te phone the news through to
Vienna but I find that all the phones are fend. Along with the
railway stetien and the town ball, the telephone center was a first
and men are in complete charge in what we estimate to be net much
more than half an hour. There were no é¢isturbences. Het a single
shet was fired. |

‘Ve learned later that merming thet our German colleague,
Kurt, may have been personally responsible for the prevention of
bleedshed. On his wag Gown the hotel cerrider, just after the
Russians entered the city, he saw twe haif-erased Preedes Pighters
trying desperately te open a window. They had their nechine guns
in their hende and sere badbdling exeitedly about “Russie, Russkic..*
Kurt ren for help and anether Mungarian cene ané Gisarsed the two
REHe ane te he Wiking shat aight Rave Salguedl Mt eee bok
ones started shooting...

X decide te take that bath after all. whe brews when
the next one sight be poesibdiec,

At 08:00 a knock en the door. A dey from the desk. "You
wished to de awakened at eight, sir." Ineredible. Sow he imagined
we could have slept through nore tnan two hours of Russian...
Well, God dARes him. ‘here’s still order. Let's hope it’s symbolic.

After breakfast — with the tanks anf their Mongolian
ceeupants just ea few yards apay euteidée the hetel esffee roms —
we reguen upstairs fer a council ef war (which is really shat it
amounts to). We decide te report directly te the ®useiane for
permiesion to leave. A 15-minute walk te BQ -- the Xeunandatura —
ie in vain anf we are tald to “eome bask temerrev.*
| ey gn time 4% 10 09230, a-hasy, helf-sunehiny éay.

“se amd equares are packed with people, Gased and watching
OEY Me Steed &, : fa, Bee ME

silently. Kany old familiar faces —— people whe in the past few
days have pressed letters in our hende or queried us on @ thoeeand
different topics ~~ slowly group around ue again. ‘the language .
barrier is no longer a barrier at ait their jooks ask the
questions. ‘What dose this mean? ge bSrgetyrwran |
a oe 1% is wot! the technical feet thst we don’t know that :
naken ut retreat upsteire to our reome. We can’t face those faces. .

But thers’s no avoiding them. Our room becomes « mecca
for scores of people, fros the streets abd from among the gueste,
nest ef whom are refugees from Budpeest whp have got as far ac
Cytr and were then out off. te, as westerners, represent aid and/or
strength. Tou*é almost think we were going te hand out machine
guns or magio~wand our electric rasers into secret weapons.

.. We dispense what “cheer” we can in the form of “Don’t
worry, watt and see, pernapa ~~ e° eteng OO RR RS
Perhaps they"ll go mmay eee

jak best of the hotel tellets are ‘abegped up. We tore up ali
our ‘motes anid teotryoed tepes and negatives, ‘but others had the
idea first. ke even fou pistels and seme loess cartridges in
some of the totiet bowls. I took the pistols out, tut where do
you hide thea? I «ent to the top floer and drepped them into the
water reservoirs of the toilets there, “7 imjperturbable logic
being that Russian soldiers snes knew the fine points ef plurbing,
iis gata: human | in the dining room in a ‘gllent, sethodical affair.
“ few  akdaweie but the aquecking of waiters’ shoes and the pinging
ef soup spoons on a plate are the loudest noises.
| : : at 2 pom. we notics an iustrian Red Gross eonvoy going
Pi town in the direction of the border, ith twe “eivilien*
cars tagging along ou the end of it. A way fer us, tool
Diary page 17

Wo give what's left of our money, cigarettes and soap
te people im the hotel anf rece after the convey. But we ure all
stopped by = tank reathieck at Mosen Magyarevar, seme 12 2'its fron
the border, Beek in freat of the Rotel in 6,tr we are besioged by
the crowis agains ‘they are espectelly disturted at eux being
refuses exit. ee

3 fhe people te whom we'd given eur few supplies return
then te us, over our preteste. Ome wenen frem Budpaest, «ho had
been stuck im the hotel with ua fer three days, apologised as she
eaids *I hope you'll understand. i'm ao glad te ese you baek again

Hot exactly our sentineats, but somehow a boost te our

Pollowing yeetertay's instructions, we return te the
Kemnandatura te talk te the Russians. Gabor and I are chesen to
repecent the group. A Bleck sway fren the building, which was a
formerly an AVE barracks, several yeople atep us. “Ben's go in
there, * they sey. "Youll sewer gat ont. fhey*1l arrest you fer
UES. Others already have been, "Smerving but there is ne choice.

3 A sentry covert ve inte © fremt Ball and eske us to wait.
Sene 50 Mungarisna are milling abouts In the 1§ minutes we nave
te survey then we decide that mont are here en « mission sinilar
te ours — an appenl to be sligued tp leaves, Dut there are a fer
others, the, *reperting for Gutgh hens sheds howe Res new cons
again, (he Oommuniate anf eelipboratern.
| ster iewiedh: apascecs ae ee enarieal
tne self-contidents, a .

Be are finnliy shosm wetetre, passing en the way litters
of farnitare anf papers throm mt famed tate the corners. The
result ef = “eloancing wvtion® ty the Besaians or the left-overs of
defiant Preeten Fightarn P|}
Diary . page 18

kenin is conspicuously on the wall in two places in the
large reom we're ushered inte. A Ailent cures fer the o14 bebtned,
whe is digectly responsinle tor our preétesnent. at the gare time,
quite honestly, & sense ef exeitenents "Se this is what it’s Like."
Fe are now among the hew-sany-atlitons? who have thas steed batore
a Russian Coskisear... Ané alec, quite honestly, swtaty palue.

| Ye are thken inte « emaller reem up the hall, te be Srard
by a Gelenel, with a Major as interpreter, in German. Al thnugh
the building 1s well heated, the officers anf soldiers never renove
their huge coats. They seem wrapped in thee Like great bears.
“The Russian Bear.” The Colonel is massive, with his fur cap
adding to his etatere, and he has og hele-like ecer on his left
eheek-bene. The Sajer, also hatted, is smell amd ecapgect.

Gur interrogation laste almost two hours. The questioning
is disorganised, witheut pattern. Ofentinese our angseers are only
half translated or ner translated at all. But it svon decones
evident that the chaotic form of our interview ts going te cur
Gise@vantage. What comes out of cur mouthe as n simple, etraicght—
forward self-evidenee, gete te the Colenel es a suspicious
irpegularity.

-. *yeu say you are on Anerican?® |

“Yes, Sir, se shown in ny passport.”

Thaispered ecneultation between the @ajer and the General.
Ttriwnphantly1 "put your passport was iseaued in Salsburg, Austria!”

“Tea, Sir, cur paseporte are valid for four years only
and I have been abroad for seven years. I had it renewed at the
American Conmilate in Sal..." )

Interruption. CGonsultatiem. A netetion en a piece
of paper. Purther attempte to explain are shruggeé off.

And then 15 minvtes of careful serutiny ef e11 the
border stamps in ny passpert.
ba Ser.euahy) "here ae your vies for Srey Melon,
Prance ané Italy?* tats it ake

$5 jun rE have none, ‘You oe tmerisene don't need isan £. |
eurepeiacs ey ae ee ee - et ee ee oe eos

If wlarviuil os Rinshts wah tun vepacs the Vga Salk

tna eters. “eb he un am nr

7 thinking anger at toes Gimme" wee Gas tad So cb Wades
etupity T stort to Danvie forth un explanation of at least this
cimple point, but am teld to out it off, te thin part of their
interrogation technique or are they really so uninformed? I’m sure
at's the lattes, vat 10 fe till meddening te be alvays on the

paseo! wen, you nes & vind to bet % Meseew," the taser tells
no with a sardents grin. I feel Like asking him shether he's sign
a notarized statement to that effeet cheuld they decide to take us
cast instead of letting us gn te the weet, :

ae After © cevningly cations tise with ny yessport, T on
asted to show xy press eretentisin. Th would bo folly, in view
of Cheke Rarvaganes, bo bite ay TRE idestaty. ,
p | thet reaction $0 “Kelis Pree Marnpe* is comparatively
A, Roa ernites Se aa
dane reaeon Ratio Héseow broatsaste to the vent, This was not
translated for the Colonel but hp diéut eon ty care. |
ee formalities with Gehor, om exile from Bungary but with
an instrian pasopert, were surprisingly shart. sea
" then, quite corésaliyn | ‘Yom uatlerstent that we are busy
“pringing erter to Gyre Ravers te your Revel ant watt, But de not
Leave the hotel, for your evn sakbn, wostiy. Yhere are still sone
reactionary elements abewty. Peet pone @risk, 4¢ you can,
and women, too. Tou wilt ieaye du enon on things are stabilised.

  
Diary , page 20

A let of bowing and thanking and shaking hands. We leave |
the Kommenéatura feeling elated. “fhe ol4 boys won’t be so bad after
all.® .

4 quick sobering up os we walk back through streets “tlied
with tanks and soldiers, end Hungerian faces. oe

We | report vack te our six esllcagues ant the rest of the
day is spent talking and speculating, - :

TUSEDAT, BOT, 6s See re

et Resigned to a period of waiting, we double our efterte
to get a ratie. Everyone ‘is asking us what's happening and we're
provably the least well inforaed. We've been Idstening to the only
radio in the hetel, in the kitchen, but 10*s embarrassing to ask the
kitehen help to turm eff «¢ Huagerien-lenguage news breaécast co that
we can listen to Viemma er the BBC. ae |

the blond bookkeeper, Kati, whe works behing the desk in
the lobby, heats of our search and gives us her private radie. She
has been a constant source of help and now this sserifies.

News reports confira that what is happening in Gytr is
happening threughout the whole country: defianse of the Russians.
There is open fighting in many-areas, passive but unyielding
resistance in others. What keeps these people going agains? such
overwhdming odds that they are ne odds at all? . | |

We neod only leek at Basgarians in ur eon ané Lister
to then talk to know the auawer. | | B¢ fa) “now, or never* with then.
They have cone this far and there is no turning beck. "furn back
to what?" as @ young student puts it te wg. “Semmanian? Hever. We
eupmrsnedhactn tapdbiadtes 3 oesssndh Ax oh -scen lla
live with this false syeten.*

neue eve: Weaktttag Gili 4 hab dnedi Giada a> tee
very group we had all but gives up fer lest. Sest, tndsed! Moy
Diary A ie i a ae a

Radio Vienna, XE and the MBG all repert "heavy fighting*
im Budapest end Gytr. We all have the same worry: our families, |
which know we're stuck here. To ur Rnowledge there has wos yet
been a shot fired in Gytr. In the streets outside, the otriki.g but
docile population mills about oll day long until the 6 p.m. curfews
the Russians, dirty and Detde-like, sit astride thetr great tanks.
An we watoh then hour after hour, Guring the day und at might, one
wonders hor they keep warm in their “irom houses") when end what
de they eat?; where 46 they sheve?; are there toilets in tanke?

At 12050 our same Colonel and Major chow up in our room
and take @own pertinent mane, passport, ste. date from ench of us
individually. We axe all s bit edgy, ompectally about the eight
birthplaces appearing on a single piece of paper. Five of us were
berm dehind the Irom Curtains Budapest, Prague, Varean, Pailin
(Retonia), and. the Banat region of Bumenia. ‘The other three are
New York City (me, Pasle, Switeerland and Bedea-Baden, Vest Gernany.

eae es But if the Russians noted anything, they didn’t let on.
the whéle performance is businese-like, and at the. seme tine cordial.
Then they are finished, the Najor cays seneone will come “in a
ee eet ieee Eee

: We are elated and nip the last of 2 , vata be, eatavcate.
cur Mangan friends, et atng to our revay nabeh Wen eflenen
| _ The afterncen veers o& snl es one comes, etn
let it be known that they're not surprime@e 9

od

By bute $8%6 arhonn that se here or maaan ta.

eeesheneie ene . Btw
. * a “ ae : . Bt :
" Were « te, ine

ne meré” ike 1s tk sca i ed Seectaead
te out in the strests again, vatuhing att waiting, wrapyed in
wese OEM iLl~£4 sting tate sat neat. et then wearing Sine terete.
tart, atending ot the pein-dplattered windes,
"I always heart Ruscton turks wore male ont of certboart. I’m
afraia they aren’t.” | i.

 
* Diery ) } f page 22

The leudspesker in the square starte blaring at 10:00.
Peeple listen for a few minuten, vat whem the anmmounser says that the
Russians have been successful in ridding the country of “fascinate and
prevocateurs," they laugh, whistle and walk away. fhis performance
is repeated a half-desen tines throughout the day.

It fe 99 per cent ef the people thet were the "fascists
end provoeateure® against Communist and Russian rule.

| In a lew moa@, we take am inventory of our supplies and
ration out our renaining cigarettes, chocolate and soap. We collect
ail our used razor blades, sharing steries we've heard about people
in Russia shaving «ith tin oans and axe diades.

derry shggeste saving the red cellophane epeners from
cigarette packeges, “to decorate cur Christees tree in Siberia.”

The diming reem at lunch hes enother new set of faces.
Budapest, spend the night in G,Sr anf then contimue their flight
towards Austria.

Our efterncen conference in on the sume subject. shall we
jein them on fect? Our “western lock" (my crew cut!®, the mere than
40 miles to the border and trigger-happy soldiers epesk out against it.
Still, why the delay en the part of the Russians? Are they checking
in Bescow (or Budapest) on who we might be ? We're oebvicusly unimportant te the Ruesians and really « bother, but will the politics)
officers arrive in @yfr econ and decide that a Redie Pree Burope
: Re draft a letter in Gernen af@reased te the Kencandatura,
-peinting out yesterday's promise of departure in "a few hours.*
Qur Swiss member, Pulver, takes the letter to the Russians, but
ie back shertiy. A Colonel bed refused te accept the letter and told
Pulver te come back and check agein gix gare heate. om the 15th!
Diary : ! page 23

Qur morale sinks to ite lewest point. smother week!

Bo ome can even stand to leek at cur chessboard, whieh haé deen a
constant source of diversion since our first day. :

| Her was it any fun watching twe of cur closest friends
leave teday, one weet, one cast. Gabor, the portier-cene-preese—chictcome~pertioer, days his meme in on the wanted list. I¢ would be folly fs
tor him te satay, and yet we watehed a man with ao broken heart leave
| The ether is a man whe has given us a eontinneus 11ft
theee past few dayt — “The Kintoter." So had we nick-nemed hin;
he is im reality a simple worker. But he ie a clever ene, tee, and
hed deen a mam of prominence im his fnetery. When the Revelution
started he became a member of the Budapest Verkers’ Council sat

he had come to Gyr in that capacity, Te dubbed him “Minister®
because of his current rele as a sert of bet-men for = nea-Comunist
Soviet bureaucracy, getting fake éecunents anf pulling eff inereéibic
things under the Russians’ noses. .

He wae « small, wiry man, adout 3S, and alwage vere a
ridieulous wool tascsel-eap. He bad been in the middle ef the heaviest
fighting in Dedepest anéd spoke of the Russians with eomplete scorn.
tow he was returming te fight egain.

| Was it bravery or séora? Both prodably, but his utter
contempt of the Scviete was something te see. Se referred te then
as “monkeys” end idiets,* ené even when effreesing then (as we hef seen
him €o) he telked to them as you 4e te the naughty ehiléren ef
unffitendly neighbers, depreeatingly, eendescendingly, firmly.

Befere Gabor, the pertier, left we gave him a message to |
be phoned inte evr Vienna offices °All well and me denger.* He |
Aian’t a2 *yet* and asked him not to. We have been sending messages |

gotten

|

'
;

out by everyone whe has icft, but have any cf cur “courtiers”
Diary page 24

THURSDAY, FOV. 8s

 & tense, unhappy day. Be are forced to sit and wait ehii«
# belt @esen of our Hungarian friends go scouting te find out shat
esenpe possibilites there are. Their reports are net very cheerfulé
There are tank blocks om all rosde leading out of dyor. Tt is
iapdasible to get a Bungerian docunent that night cet tis past the
Russians. ‘The train te Sopron, near the border, is “ost probably"
eannmeliien by either Bungariens or Ruseian® or doth. MRE ke AAC ES

Depelecank unk Watehing fren wus tintin; We duit ptthy- 00s
huiaiiis ti diiedamhaaies ted hae ebviously in the precess of flecing.
Loaded with sacke and bage, with children being oo
awe Qtek with: personal effertes. ‘ind even © touch of the South Seas,
thengh sati-mutflerede coverel: people unrying puis! aw:the tps of
their heads! = st tt Rk Sat Saline gaa he eh clas

: suk: tase Selatan: Sha’ Semmes sell eer he weak simone —
there are thousands who stay, on? their reasous are the same: to
ee ne ee eomeny ey veins Oe ee ye ee ee

Two old miners, Sole. Seer tau late omrdoued” they’
heave walked the 40 siles from Tatebenya te inform lecel authorities
that they will not return to work until the Russians leave. They
have nothing to lowe -- pine: Sake pares ene. 50n ppeenthtty: at
buying food, and maybe their lives. He " Tse Bi:

They alwo tell uo that our visit lnet week is etd being
tnlked ebout in Tatabanga. How the mighty have fallent now we
4en’t even have honeyed words that sould: sapplaneat our chocolate
bare of six days eg0ses- : aes ce

Another report in the afternoon: ee bakers of Gytr,
waving heard rumors that the workers in sajer factories were debating
a return to work, have issued a proclamation —~ they stop backing
Dery aS page 8s
bread if the workers return te their benuhes.

Defianee, defianee, defiance... | 5
| There are some signe cf normal life, howrer, even though
there is hardly anyone werking. Many of the natiensl flage ené
ne workers riding the buees. ‘The traffie light velew our winter is
working again, but it has almost no vehicles te control. fhe market
pleee is cpenegein and sormal for the first time in days (with
reports that the farmers have net raised a prises a penny, even though
feed is alreety short), oat sheps ere atill closed, but you can buy
cigarettes and sone ether cennoditics at the “beak foor.* Rewspapers
are being given out at mony seal) kiosks; they are free, fer the
government ie trying every means to reach ite rebellious population.
up te say good-bye. They feel it is hepeless, anf dangeréus, to stay
any lenger. Rack departure, whether weet or east, brings the same
tears ané leaves the seme enptiness. These brave, brave people...

«Sapper is made more interesting by the presence of four

western newoomers -- twe Egyptian business nen, 0 white-Russiah freelanes journaliat whe says he works for "Paris Eateh® anf an Austrian
acting es guide anf interpreter. We're eager te talk th then, but
they are close~acuthed. ‘They do admit that they*ve come ont fron
Budapest. We epeeulate that the twe Egyptians wore predebly in
up im the Brolution.

fhe four are put out by their datatmment, but hepeful of
getting perniesion to leave tomorree. It ought te be interesting: the
Egyptians, yes, bat will the Russians give an exit permit to one
ef their former citisens, the "Parise Nateh" aan? Or is be really that’

A eanse for prancing anf back-alapping after hearing «
6 pam. RPE breedeast: the code message, "Dupla ict gut angekeznen.”
That’s our portier friend, Gader. It seams he hne apriveé in Vienna
Diary ts | page 26

and hee informed our f antiies that we're al] well. Tank God we can
relaz some on that scord!

A BSt of contd relief — and necessity —— as we get «
barber te come te the rpom and go through a round of hefreute. And
*reund™ is about what are, at least in back. Winkler, the
Be-lin photographer, +¢: tee pictures ef us all anf, as e Leng-hair,
even cendescends to } hie hair out like mine.

Bag news at I 100, seven otter nevmes, coming ont bron
Budapest, get stopped  GyOr ant sent te cur hotel. Teetr cars and
equipeent were confi: » uniike ours, whieh we etf22 have in our
possession. I know t of the seven (aix Bnglisheen end Bente Leiser
of $y Sal the: grees anente eteiguy Cenk Sats sage gut te
efraié of doing Sttea with us -— eapeciaily me an RPE.

Bae a the others | or less go their oun way end start hounding
is Siceaniebeia fee shumtenton tx dentine ws Méssd. ‘te tar os
dace Wikuinan, “Pantha: Deiat thigh aight ieait thine Cine unt
besides, there is ee ee ee ee
eround a good deal. 3 of

fe have had seperti the oruing te ext dom out talt
when he saw long listd of Rungerian nawes on « 400% at the Reseian
HQ. Our friends in tie hotel -- these that haven’t yet fled -— warn
ae that we might be néxt. But they have ne selution te our quantry.
tere stuck. : /
ay apparently, are the Sgyptians. They arrive beck today,
having been turned dadk at the border by the Russians, despite their
passes from the Gytr jemnantant. ‘They are more silent tnan ever,

but still eonfidens that they'll get this "*miseunderstanding*

étedeek ap tommren. | 3

      
  

 

 

    
  
   
=

| There is « big Buscicn vithérers] late ot might: 27 tanks
end other heavy equipment, going in the direction of Remeron and
Lake Balaton, away from the border. aE Crh, or ean’t
we be allowed through? :

-. sbthough £t *leses o little something in the translation,”
we txink the funsiest renerk of our stay te date ie that mate by
Jerry who, in the aiédie of the night, aske for  Tlashligh} in
eaten ty Steathity She mmmene on tn. Sent ap May: ahe te Se
farkness. — .

 

‘Ive warely ever snoked befere breakfast, tut I can rardly
wait these daye to light up in the morning. A eign ef the tines?
un “ft eases Bete vertaty tm the teal, ‘tenes $n 00831 0
rapid turnover among thoes eating it. The refugees — for thay
already weer thet label — sentinue te come and go.

‘Tue hotel and ite restaurant, thiré-elase under any eatin
are barely struggling slong. 4% least helf ths help has vanished,
mest of then te the wast. fhe dining reom murals ere dreadful:
peamente picking grapes or senething. Did their artist win a Stalin
. & geed pereentage of the hotel pluabing fixtures are either
broken ox stopped up and there’s no one to fix them. Utilities nen
aren’? exactly available in the siddle of « Revelution,

There ie mo euch thimg es an electric machine (but nor was there ever!
the becen anf the dust-pan are their tesla of the trate.

Que mettees other bite of akebhincess ‘the xusners in the
a, ate eng enihy Ne ene Ot senghy Seong AetRED eat ott
eratiets Ge tems wayA. be aig : ao =
if “nour chaseweatd, 0 emai, deh wom of sheet 40, «ith
@ ready enile and « couple ef silver teeth, exntinuss to give us
geod service — under the cireumstanees. dhe has a big job: cleaning
day, as we smoke and eft and wander about ané suoke sane uere. The

 

fleer. 3 | |
There in mare contact with the other group ef serreupendents

during the day, and ee ali 15 agree that official pleas to the
Russians are the only way of getting out. Of qeurse, the ethers
have no eheice; enly we have our care parted outsides
at the hotel at $c15 pom. and asking whether Leiser and I will cone
te the Keumendetera. We get the werd via Kati at the desks *A
Russian efficer wanta te ses you.* There ie a glance ~— it only
lasts a second - about this call in the night to Soviet HG. ‘The
familiar tectie?

the Sritésh serreepondente ask te be allowed te coms, too,
are unloeked anf we follow the Majer inte a emall blue Pebdeda car
waiting euteide. Leiser sakee emall talk about the cold and the
late Russian werking hours. ‘The Major speaks English, al though
you must talk te Ria slowly lest be nies your meeming. Leiser’s
Eee: SRN PE ET ee PAS NS. er o-  SOe  oe
open question.
Diary 3 page =

We are shown inte « room crewled «ith officers. leiser
ie firet end vegine telling bis stery te a Gelensl (met sear-face).
Leiser explains that he hes hie Budapest stery @eaéline te meet and
a family waiting im Vieman. ‘The deer apens sensubere iu the uiddle
eof this explenetion ané in wale a Sajer General. We all get to our
feet anf the General takes over “the chair.” Whet can this mean?

fhe General dccen’t keep us waiting, ;

i reetee Anette hte Beane niuh st GEESE. Gs
netebesk, The thumbing ef pages, end then:

‘Mich oe of you is Proderick b, Rier?*

Leiser pointe at me and I point at ue anf 2t seems pretty
unemimeus. "I am, General.

I am ordered to wait anf heiser finishes Bis stery. Be
is diemigved end told te return te the hotel. |

@ne Ganeral turne te ne amd says that hs has « report
that I am being held under arrest tn Gytr. Ba, on the contrary,
cenfertably in a hetel. WiLL T sign 2 otetenent to the falatty
ef the arrest charge?

fhe next hour is spent senanticaiiy. dieik teen ee”
coréial discussten ef the meaning of werds anf phrases. #11) 1
efmit that I’ve aot been under srregt but merely dotaindé? I bring
ap the Amerigan phrase “house arrest,” but the Generel explains that
ue such phrase exiets in Buasien. “Gnlees," be says, °A Russian
wife can got her ¢runben busbend confined to Bis heuse by police so
that he can’t geo out deoning eguin.*”

ss Bvemtuahly the three Russians (the General, the Golened

and the Majer interpreter) put their heads together anf éraft «
statement im Russian. ‘The Kajey degine writing 1¢ out in English
but I offer to write is nyeelf, as time is éragging. the text is
senething as follews:s
Diary page 350

“ge, the undersigned, agree that correspondent Frederick
L. Hier, has net been held under arrest but nerely detained in Gytr
under comfortable eireumetances in a hotel and due te @xieting
conditions in the aren at the time. I, F.L. Hier, have ne formal
complaint te make against the Russian Military Unit. 1f sign this
statement of my own free will end without external preesure.”

ty English tezt is then translated beek inte Ruesian agsin—they are being highly correet -- and re all four sign beth copies.

There ia come alight discuseion sbout RFE again, but most
of 1% gets lost in translation. I°ve discovered that by talking
rapidly when anewering delicate questions, the g@esues are confused
and imberpreting diffieult. |

| I leave by 11:00 p.m. The General apoligizes fer the nth
time for the aisunderstanding and ineenvenience. He eayn we will
all leave in a day or tre, “as soon as the matter ia cleared dack
through Budapest." Ths causes a final tug, but I feel now that
we’ll all get out for sure and that we haven’t deem conpmmised, rea ly.

I am sent dack to the hetel alone in the staff car, with
only the driver for company. The streets are dark and deserted. I
feel like offering the driver « cigarette but hold off. Unreasonable,
perhaps, but is he any different than these soldiers sitting on
their tanks, the eeceupatien forcées?

Bask at the hetel, I find that uy ecXieagues have been
worrieé to death. tLeieser, afraid that I was going te be arreste, had
told t em more of the details about our Kcmeandatura interlude.

Ry optimiam imm’t completely contagious, in view of post
disappointments, but we prepare for bed in fuirly good spitita.

And we go to ded lnughing. Our twe Egyptian Sphinmxes are
back for the third time! Shameful to laugh, I suppose, but one can’?
help feeling that this is ene of the comedy features of the Revobtien.
‘Diezy . : ie 5

3 Five ef our greup go te Church (Lest might the General
lifted the ban om leaving the hotel). Someone approached then there
and seid the Church bef heard of our deteinment and wae seeking ways
to help us financially. )

_ ‘The Rungarian Church — perseeuted, ol] but outlaweds rodded
and vilified for 12 yeare — ané 1% te going to help ys! My God, «hat
a peoplel ,

Por two days the other group ef correspondents has had o
ayetes of “read watches,” in case a western cer from Budapest should
pase through Ogir on the way te Vienna. This serning the first of
these newsmen stuck in Badapest begin soming thrqugh. We all flag
down cars and give messages to be tranemisted te families and
offices in Austria.

Each of the cars has a special peas from the Russians.
Devastatingly frustrating te see all the rest of these people getting
out and here we sit.

| With, apparently, the Egyptians, forever anf e day. They
left again lest evening but are eseprted back into GySr this morning
for the fourth tine. And by no less than 11 tents! Of at least
Reet their little putt—putt Fiat came into the city in the middle
eof an 1l—tank cenvey. The two Nasser boys and their comperiona are
really furious =- ae well they might be, decause this time their
cer as well an their pride was emashed. All the side windows vere
somehow broken out. We never 46 find out just what happened -— they
won’t talk te amyone by now -—- but it is theught that their car may
have been done in by Crech border guards. The Russians head finally
weariea of their case and suggested they try ac a final reeort exit
through Czechoslovakia. They must have rum inte an unfriendly force

somewhere .

Their tragic-comic fate doesn’t cheer use for leng. By :
3930 pem. (dusk coming on) we’re sure we won’t get out today. Pire {
Diary page 32

of our group decides, therefore, to go for a etreli.

Perhaps their decision brought the Russians. ‘In any case,
at exactly 4:00 poms our English-speaking Majer appears in the lobby.
"Please, everyone pack iueediately and come to the Konmandatura.”

A mad, sourzying 20 minutes trying to get our things and our
group assembled. The impatient Major ets stonier and stonier,
finally announcing that he won t walt any longer. Ae he storus out
the euinging door, the last of cur neshers chews up from Bis walk.
et the Kommandetura each of us is given a paper, signed
and stamped by the two military commenter, de m farewell gesture, ve
are ordered to produce all cameras and file and the latter is
eonfisoated. there to a brief diseussion on the merits of various
types of film, American, Bnglish and.Gernan, a0 well as balck and
white versus color. It was a round-table we were happy to out short.

‘Re are told to go out through Sopron, instead of the
shorter route through Mickeledorf, but we didn’t pause te-debate
the point. te step few « eocent ah the: Retell tw cay Git: goomtyes,
which are short, choked and tearful 8 = a a

| It ie a silent ride, for the most part. te haww te BF,
pe Soni vp sete nape Noes lin em abe omnia 48 3
the sa@dest 40 miles any of ue hee ever traveled. :

There ie hardly « light anywhere. thi inetd Gomntien Sa
blacked out because of the curfew, But behind those darkened :
windews there fe no curfew on the etoutness of heart or the brightnese of spirit. Sor would there ever be. One is convinced that the
Russians could stay @ thousand years and still not crush these
hearte or epirite. If I'm eure of few other things about this
Revolution, I'm at least positive of that...

We meet a first roadblock just outside Gyr, ané a second
before Soppon. Fach of them is a tense affair, as grimy soldiers
¢xamine our papers ty the light of the car headlights. The sSopron
eeldiers «pend 15 xinutes grunting over our documents, and chhy
: . ; . ir m . °
i be eS . ei ‘ rl : . ‘ oe “,
. ~a* ’ " ‘, i eae t eh > ed
N72 a ay : ites Soe > j . y ene ae < *
j ’ i ‘ Ger... - a —*& ‘ 3
Y é p, : ; Fa Sa ag? .

after we anak te see ts Nenad een we tlie ‘pontine.
‘ieieecs In fopron we are directed to dite Koumastatera ant have
to go through still anether registration, the pat takin
town of names, aftressta, birthéates ant the reat of it, When ics one
of these officers geing te get on to us and Seet#e that we ouzit to
atay around awhile, after allf fertunately, the Majer in charge
has @ sence of huser and scolds us lightly: "I’m going to reat your
niwapepere aot Listen te your netic mavteee te: eee how yon report
om bet das happened in Mungesy.” i ,
Bsa eae te gut a further set pf ppeces ‘and sot ent through the
darkness for the border. The Mungerten derder etetien ia familiar
to Jerry and met we steed on the other side of 1% for come hours
two weeks ago, watehing scores of Burgarians, exultant if grin-faced,
peice weatern wupplies onto their trueks.
3 3% is ¢olf as we step out of oar care in the stillness.
The only light comes from s single kero#ine lamp en a desk in the
customs building. The Hungarian guard “oean’t say a word to ue as
he takes our passports and site forn tc examine trea.

m writing

 

: Me flipe pages and logks ot covers and flips more pxuges
fer 25 minutes, ‘There are no questions. We offer him a cidgarette
sist he teres one, pute 1¢ in hin poeret and returms to flipping.
tos a word. Finally:

eae  *Rungerian visas?"

*Seli, you Bee we didn’t need visas when we Game in two
weeks afBee.*

Silence. Flipping. —
Rix vies, nix gut.* | | :

The customs wan gcte ep and leaves the room. Fe hear him
dtering the phone from cut in the hall. Gabor, our one Mungarian
epeaker, top hear enly parts of the cofiversation. The guard is
bpparest2y fe@ up with vico-leee preplke coming through his post.
bneutan*t eoneene telephone Budapest? |
Liery : , . pape 34

| eet when Gabor dhispers this information to us, ee node and
‘aa: thie came time towards th= kerosine lamp. ¥e all understand
imine@iatedy. Someone else points ‘co a chair (the only weapon in
eient; amd another to a flashlight on the desk, fe survezy tho
windows iy eee nan elgat of ue ere going to cet out two wrinlows
haa ona €50r on a matter Qf secon...
: it ta. ‘ont of the «cueption to be axtegvae rem anly a fox
feet from Aug trian eoit. If the Mungcarians stop ae, £t would be
the Kadar Hutigariene whe rould be our next {nterrogstors. The
ee ene would *xpiain simply that we vers no lLenger im tueir hands,
Gur customs an comes back and starts ari ting on a adixty
pleee of paper ith fe (peneil stub no lenger than his Little finger.
Prom his t4dergantred ‘f2ipping of our pasaports we can’t figure
out what he’s writing ‘down. |
‘The. acrape of his ee out te the phone again.
tn the middle of his conversation \apparently «ith hia
‘upertora in Sopron) he breaks off an@ yells to his compenion
cuteide atiking him te reac off the number of oar car license piste.
the companion ticks it off: "# 4-G-4-8-4-9."
Our member is resily ¥ 4~4800. Be has nis-read itt
“e will never know «hether tais aistake saved our necks
mt not, wor witat 1t wam the superiors in jeprom wanted chen they
agked for our mumbers. It could be that instructione were to let
this oar go throwgh. Or it could be thet the Mrestans had @iscorered
their "wistake”" in letting us get away and vere looking fer our vehicl!
In amy case, the customs van returns te his desk, picks up K
his stamp and pounds each of ovr paseperts enee. fe thank hin, he
erunts and we leave. 3
The barrier goes up — one of the loveliest maneuvres i
oun renenber — and in two nimites we are through the no-man’s~land
ant on the Austrian side.
| ss hour iater, the Yienna office.
~erd a=
Binry , page 35 te

EEILOGUBs

All the while we were im Bungeary, efforts were being
made te get ua released. Radio Pree Rurope, friends in Austria
(the American Bmbasay found itself unable te eet) and in other
part of Europe and Jean were all busy bombarding Yachington «i th
telegrams and letters. The final result was an official protest
from Washingten, t-anemitted through Ambaseader Bohlen in Moscow
te Gromyko by private letter. Fe will never kmow whether the
Russian Major “eneral sade a special trip te Gytr from Budapest
beesuse of our case, of whether he just happened to be in the area
and assigned the task of investigating the pretest. Our
supposition ise that the Ruscians, sver-csensitive an these times
to weetern épinion, @idm’t vant te make an iesue of us -— or me,
to be more specific. Thus, the statesent fren ze that I hadn’t
beer ni streated and had no sonilininiies. Onee the Russians had
that admission, I could go.

S22 S28640880
