 

‘s posed cover arranzgenentse Maddox replied that he definite
i ly hoped that we would arrange the NEwe cover.

%
a te
ao Pa

>

‘A cable was sent to Maddox. about- X-2 "gs objections, .
‘suggesting that the Vatican picture was getting cluttered
and asking whether Maddox insisted‘on pushing the proe

At this point the matter was referred to me By
Penrose, not for cover clearance (as the proposed. cover
arrangement was not approved by the Branch} but for

) j. comment. After conference with you and Shepardson I
i

went to New York and discussed the proposal with Dolbeare
who in turn discussed it with Hughes. Dolbeare replied
that the NCWC "is an organization. definitely controlled

_ by the Bishops of this country, the head of which, Bishop,

Mooney, is an eadtremely consclentious and meticulous
administrator, and follows every detail of the work of
the -organization.+* To make use of this organization. for ©

- govercin the way propossd, would contain seeds for a

“@candal of” serious propérfidns. If it is proposed to - ea . 5
_go any further, 1 would urgently advise consulting with |

' the neral, who is, himself, familiar with these natters a oe ;

and woukd, I believe,, insist on the very greatest pru= “ = ° Loe a
“derice-. I'may add that~the draft letter to itr. Kall’ con- . . OS
tains one or two statements which seem to me wholly ine | ai |
cautious, such as "there is no difficulty in sending . é =
cabies ‘arid pouch reports in the quickest way.’ Incidentelly, 1

the NCWC,-‘at present, makes use of Pucci, and supposedly, mn

: they - shortly will have’ the services of &r, Max Jordan,

"Zi.
pe

' formerly of NBC." Dolbeare requested that 1. consider

his comments as a personal rether’ than a formal statement.
, Hughes commented “under.no " circunstences do I believe : sO .
the proposed detter should be delivered to the NCWC", ae
“Under the circumstances Nr. Shepardson did not wish to

“recomnend the approval of the cover arrangement ‘to Cheston.

I advised Shepardson that I thought Cheston would turn it Loe

down if it was presented. On 31 Karoh Shepardson cakled .

Magdox that the cover could .not be arranged. .

*. On 4 April Maddox ‘replied asking for a reconsidaratiéh
and stating that a simple delivery of the letter ‘from the

. subject was all that was required. | 7 .

Sheperdson referred the question to Penrose, you and }
me, with you in charge. He asked that it%be reconsidered
With Hayer and Dolbeere and ‘that thetadur., of the- "Crabbe"

_. peports be studied. Penrose talked: to’ ne “Saturday ,daking Bt bee
“ that a enable along the lines | ‘of the abiached proposed’ . gt

Qos

cm) :

- SECRET

Leff oscett

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

“help you. 
a Kes

cable te sent to Maddox, and that a letter also be -gsent him (Maddox). Since you are in charge, I should
think you should write the letter. This memorandum may

My. own conclusions’ are: «

Ls The letter in its present ‘form should’ not be.

' delivered because of Hughes! and Dolbeare' 8 opinion, and
Pearose's agreement. ‘

2. If the arrangement 13 to be made at all. aradi
should write another letter through the ordinary mails
but» Maddox should’see it to sake sure it is. not indiscreset,
OSS should have no other connection with the matter.

ry

3. There Ad <gome question as to whether Cheston's
and the General 'g, approval should not be had‘ as even °
Maddox' knowledge of the letter is close to a cover arrange~
ment.

fat cc an R.C.N.

Attachments

&

fae

 

 
