C01441001

   

 

 

te, rope "> Bit Fees 88
APPROVED FOR : , :
RELEASE March 2009 rn

13 September 1949 Nae

FEO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs_ tc

MEMORANDUM FOR: MESSRS. . : !

 

SUBJECT : | Policy Direotive Governing Organization of
Russian Refugees in Germany and Austria,

1. Attached hereto is an authorization which we have just
received in connection with the subject above mentioned and which
provides the general jines of policy guidance which we have been
awaiting. I believe that it is now in order for us to proceed
with the preparation of a plan and project or series of projects
and that we should move rapidly into the first phase of organizing
this group just as soon as we have completed the necessary coordination with other agencies and the selection of personnel
for this job. |

2. For your information, this memorandum is not stated in
the language of a directive for the specific reason that
Mr. Kennan does not consider it appropriate for OPC to operate
on the basis of orders or commands from the State Department,
He caused the memorandum to be rewritten and couched in the
language of"policy clearance, Note especially the wording of 2 2
the first sentence of the second paragraph, I have the thir ;
impression that this represents a development in Mr. Kennan's
own thinking and I rather anticipate that over a course of time
there will be a further trend in the direction of confining the
form of the policy guidance which we receive to more general
and less concrete instructions.

Con.

ER,

|

ADPC/FGH/mac
Att.

Memorandum for ADPC from Mr, Kennan, September 13, 1949,

Subject: “Organization of Russian Refugees in Germany
and Austria."

oh |
ER Aes Copy 1 of 3 copies
BH sicnet

 
c01441002

APPROVED FOR RELEASE | oa SE oH Mo am.
March 2009 | a :

EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs (c) : : ( | 5)
EO 12958 3.5(c) September 13, 1949 2

 

 

MEMORANDUM FOR:

Mr. Frank G. Wisner,
Assistant Director for
Policy Coordination, CIA.

SUBJECT: Organization of Russian Refugees in
Germany and Austria.

It is desirable, as soon as possible, that there
be established: among the Russian political refugees
in Germany and Austria a central organization with
headquarters in Western Germany. When appropriate,
branches of such an organization might be encouraged
i to be established in Paris and in New York. It will
i be necessary that certain assistance and facilities
i be provided to enable these refugees to create and
maintain such.an organization. In addition, the |
| - refugees selected should receive constant guidance” ~t”
P in order to make their organization as effective :
and secure as possible in order that its accomplish- |
ments may be in line with the foreign policy objectives of the United States...

Oe

 

err ak ttt yr
a

en tape Sey =
a .

 

The central organization should be small in
size and composed of representatives from as many
as possible of the important anti-Communist refugee
parties and groups. Its members, of course, should :
be of unquestioned political reliability and integrity, © (
actively anti-communist and in touch with the reali- .
tles of Soviet life today. Emphasis should be placed
_at the outset on the humanitarian objectives of the organization which should be declared to be a welfare
‘organization created for the purpose of assisting
‘Russian D,P.'s and refugees. The Committee should
concern itself in the beginning with the various)
welfare problems affecting Russian refugees in Ger-~
many and Austria, such as improvement of food and
housing conditions, satisfaction of cultural needs,
amelioration of legal status, education of ehildren,

assistance

NG
gf HS

      
c01441002

ceive po uidance, in connection with the profects and operations, (SS one

‘nel for such assistance as Russian refugees in the .

4 * . ‘
BS
_ 3 .
yg? . tp: . ‘
‘

we Dna

assistance in resettlement, etc. Only after the

Committee is firmly established and its effective
ness demonstrated should steps be taken to utilize
the organization for political purposes.

When it is considered that individuals or
elements affiliated with the refugee committee
are capable of initiating and developing certain
operations, the matter will be further discussed
with you in order that your organization may re
 

 

 

 

It would be inadvisable, at least in the beginning, to associate the National Committee for
Free Europe in New York with the organization of
any Russian Welfare Committee. This position, however, is not intended to preclude the New York Com- —s_|
mittee from providing support for a Russian Welfare
Committee, when such an organization has developed
to a point where its importance and responsibility
can be assessed. In the beginning, a New York branch
of a Russian Welfare Committee will provide the chan-.

 

 

 

 

 

 

United States may desire to extend to the activities
of the Committee in Europe.

advised of . activities in Germany as related

to the Russian political refugees in the U.S. Zone
of Occupation in order thet wo capers Hy
receive the neces es to carry ou eir
mission The appropriate U.5S.
officials in Austria will also be advised in a

Similar sense in connection with any: lactivities
in this field which may take place in Austria...

The U.S. ac Commissioner in Germany will be

+ tee Sa et

 

  

 
