C05458949

t

EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs

 

sane

CONFIDENTIAL) . |

eS

 

|APPROVED FOR |
IRELEASED) DATE:
16-Feb-2011 |

OUTLINE OF THE
UNDERSTANDING Ghat raat
OFFICE OF POLICY COORDINATION
AND

NATIONAL COMMITTEES FOR FREE EUROPE

OTR eT mn eC EC | ATI EPA

On 22 op 77 2/3
Bok /2 FOLDER /

 

4 October LOLY

eaerenemene oeentmmeienieaiadiiinitaidt teat nian TT .
C05458949

UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE NATIONAL COMMITTSE FOR Fifth EUROPE
AND THE OFFICE OF POLICY COORDINATION

Section A: Introduction

1. This outline of the understanding between the National
Committee for Free Nurope and Office of Policy Coordination presents:

a. The purposes for which NCFE was established and
the programs that it expects to undertake and execute.

b, The vasic principles governing the relationships
between NCFE and OPC,

c, The basic facilities, support and services that
will ve provided by OPU for NCFE,

d. The authority, responsivility and control thet
shall be exercised in the operational and administrative
relationships between NUFE and OF,

Section Purposes and Frograms of NCFE. be

Ee cimiemmnamnenpmaanaumiaiiiiiaiel sic ti iri tn de i co oe cael
1. Its purposes, aS concisely set forth in the Declaration
of Volicy, are the following:

"The Conmittee!s support will be offered *4 to the
intellectual and political leaders who have come temporarily
to this country, seeking the freedom denied them in their
own Jands, It will aid them in their peaceful efforts to
prepare the way toward the restoration in Fastern Europe of
the social, political and religious liberties in which they
and we believe.

Specifically, the Comnittee will elp these non-Fascist —

and non—Communi st ist leaders:
their ] “—

To maintain Lhenselves in useful gccupations Juring
enTorced stay in the United States:

 
C05458949 po

~ 2 =

To come to know the oeople of the United States and to
understand their snirit and ais;

    
   

 

To encruve in efforts by radio

keep alive aQom geeks OW CL izens in

of individual and national freedom;
seta Ate YE fH NL PA IE LL BARTRY ESA OP IR Lene ARETS {Poe NEA RT

 

xress and other Ca Sans.. Go
rope the fhe idea is

ba reed ale he ee

   

a eter

establish effective in ae of 3 bea OO perk) 0n i bl taMee
sina Be opean leaders in the Un Ini ted atates. ind £9, ,goordinate
their plans with those of sinitee r leaders abroad,
RTT ATE RT PON, 52 Bal ich at ps ot Abn ARS BO ig OS mtsaausionsputnsoe
The Uoimittee will rally populur support in the United
States tor the cause of Free Surope sand, in this way, will
sid the cause of freedom everyshere, It will raise and
dispense funds in behalf of this cause."

Basic Principles

 

Section C:

      

lL. The following basic principles shall govern the relationwliaps vetween OFC, an agency of the U. S. Government, and NCFZ, a
corporation wreennl eal unicr the luws of the Stute of New York:

a. In view of the ourposes and programs set forth
in Section §% of this outline, it 1s essential for NCPE

Lo veceive direct policy vuidince, Tinancial stp
other ussistance from the United states Government, Ore I

  
    
  

; Dies r-rel alah” he real!
Nas vecen Jes Siena ted as the ,overnmential activity to provide

ie lana Neath Deane shite eRe pAT ds ihe Tt aati he Res eT Te ANS SO TEI

suc TM aance, support: “and” yee stance.

Naren bp heer Mp a ev etek Dahan oe NBA By TSR ity oS Opes.

o. In view of tie stature and apility of the officers
of NCFB and the vublic contrels to which they will be
subjected under applicable laws, NCFE.muy be riehtfully.

regarded us autonomous; ovub in the exercise of its sutono nOmMy
(in ennener et: sieamer ce Re

0 Ta kad 5 en neg?

Tt will niturally ue | Jue regard for the source Sur iis

2 ene USP na Spey deta “ut etiuapenstie: WEAR ea ARS eS SI Ala ALERT OPP Co 87 ee ARTE

ra
Pe unis »

 

 

Cc. To substantiate its autonomy und effectively cerry
out Lts orovrams it Leo essentisl:

(1) , NCHE still ve responsivle for the
nneertes srg ee ct eee aren
exceution SA POVEL PROLFSRS Tn 4 proper and
Sitteient a mantier . EEE am a

fh
fe

eee IRE AEE CE, ES AOE Rata we
c05458949

 

-~ 3 
(2) That Orc be ioc aes informed of sdvain
been ot } Cab TSAI PME So ae uel qe eed tie WINE gate
istrative, orgarivest Tons: nd operation activities
Sis PB ib pean di sae ear ERE IRAE bn

nee at

UT orIeyY “ES “Srovia Ae uf Bettye policy” Gud ale
Support. and assistance. 7 °

“atte

(3) Thu: hut procedures oe developed which will

enable NCFE und O7@ fo work’ rx topethor with the required

He w@. read

jegree ‘of “efficiency and secubity,

‘einen OPOME eda AT ai eie, eerer nena a Spies:

 

Section Jv: Support to ve provided by OFC
1. The Office of Policy Coordinition;

é. Has underiritten the organizstional expense of
NGPE and shall cuntinue to provide suostantianl funds yor
aporoved projects th.t sre not adecuately financed from
privute sources,

ue Shall provide the channel for official U. 8.
Goverment policy suidsnce, support ani assistance to
WILT
riCEE.

c. Shall provide or sssist in estsblishing effective
liaison with government agencies such as the bxecutive
Gifice of the president, Department of Stute, Defense,
Treasurey (Buresu ol [nternal itevenue),. Justice (FBI and
I&WN S$), and the Federal Communications Commission,

d. $hall provide . assistance to NCrh in establishing

hag eet mer a Me rf

eppropriute. “standards - tO govern ‘budgetary, accounting,

» re ~SeURTEY SUT AMT LS

project, ope ational, “reporting”
trative pi rocedures,

FOP a hath RR a ed

td
ee

Section Eb: sAuthorit Responsibility and Control

         

de Lesaily NCFuW receives its uuthority from its charter,

which was granted by the State of New York, sand this authority

delegated in part to the NCIS staff through its Directors, its
Hxecutive vonmittce and its cfficers, Responsibility flows back
through tne same cnannels to the State of New York and the public,
However, duc to the manner and purposes for which NCFE was estab~
lished, and in recognition of the fact that a substantial part

arm Bet Ge ey
C05458949

~i
of its revenue has and will continue to be provided oy the

U.
pe

it

5, Goverment through OPC, appropriate consideration must
civen to the high degree of government interest with which
is endowed and invested, The covert nature of this rcovern
ment interest does not munimize the importance of the relationship oetween NCFE and the U. S. Government but increuses their
joint responsibility for saferuarding the confidence and trust
that has been reposed, To assist in discharging its responsiollities NCFE shall adopt the following proce-Jjures;:

 

4. Budgetary. aA budgetary system shall be established
which shall reflect as accurately as possible all foreseeuadle revenue and expenditures (voth administrative and
operational). This widgetery system is currently operating
on a montnaly vasis snd shall be extended to a cuarterly
and annual basis as soon as possiole. 411 budgets shall
be submitted to the Board or txecutive Committee ind to
OrC and insofar as the budget reflects proposed expenditure
of government funds shall be subject to OFC approval.

 

 

|

b.

 

 

 

Cc, Harmarked Funds. anv donations or contributions which
are given to NCFE for a specific project shail be eurmariced
for such activity and shall not be used for any other purpose
Any such funds which sre not expended or obligated for the
specified project shall be returned to the donor or reallo~
cuted if the donor so requests.

 

 

 
C05458949

&

_ 5 ~

d.. Accounting. Monthly and annual statements providing
adequate information about assets, liabilities, income and
disbursenients shall be furnished to the Executive Committee
and OPC. For the present the monthly reports shall include
schedules explaining all items in excess of fifty dollars,
but it is expected that this requirement will be modified as
soon as substantial financial support is received from public
sources,

e, jdministrative Instructions. 4 series of "Administrative
Instructions!" has been or shall be issued ‘by.NCFE to its staff
to establish standards and procedures for such matters as the
following:

(1) Employment of staff personnel
(2) Employment of consultants

( 3) Travel
(4) Security
(5) Incurring of obligations

f, Montnly Reports. Monthly reports shall be submitted
to the Executive Committee and OPC to reflect the following:

(1) Progress of various programs

(2) Progress of projects

(3) Problems in the fields of policy, finance,
organization or administration,

I

—

he. Liaison, Wothing in this outline shall be interpreted
to discourage the officers or staff members of NCFE from establishing or maintaining such normal relationships as any private
citizens or organizations might have with any government official
or agency.

 

 

 
