INFORMATION RESEARCH DEPT. 2 =
ee ree ee ele a a ) LY a as

 
  
    
  

)
Keon 54 rh Overlan Go, ee

Fre. Fao aa

    
   
   
  
    
 
 

No.

Dated Ki et)
Received in fa
Regisiry— Ritz

| References to former relevant papers

(Print)

low disposed of)

Mek Peoken...b8 ‘len.

THIS IS A COPY

‘THE ORIGINAL HAS BEEN RETAINED
IN THE OEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
2344) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1858

| References to later relevant papers

48255
 

 

CONFIDENTIAL

Report _on_a visit to Radio Free Europe, Munich

I spent three days in Mumich, from November 24-27,
primarily in order to renew personal contact with RFE, see
something of their organization, and look into the possibility
of a freer interchange of research material. During that
time I had extensive discussions with Mr. William Griffith,
Political Adviser to the European Director of RFE (Mr. Con on);
and with the local representative of the Free Europe Press
(with its headquarters in New York), a closely associated
though separate organization which is responsible for the
preparation and dissemination of written publicity and
propaganda material. I also visited the FEP balloon site
near Berchtesgatien. In the short time available I was
not able to investigate in detail the running of RFE's
radio services in the various Satellite languages, or
examine programmes or scripts. The following notes are
therefore essentially to be considered as supplementary
to information already available about RFE, and not as
a comprehensive report.

RFE's policy

26 The basic aim of the organization is to speak as the
voice of the Satellite peoples. Great attention is therefore
paid to developing the radio service in each language as a
distinct entity with its own national characteristics,

and to ensuring that the refugees from the Satellite

countries who staff the five services (Polish, Ozech,
Hungarian, Roumanian and Bulgarian) not only run the programmes
but feel that the service is theirs, Great emphasis is also
laid upon keeping in touch with developments and thought

in the country concerned, and to obtaining “local colour"

for programmes. The only American on each service, apart
from technical staff and a representative of the Programme
Department (see para 4 below and Annex A),is attached in an
advisory capacity, being responsible to the Political Adviser.
The Political Adviser or his deputy take the chair at a

daily meeting of each service, at which the programme for the
day and current events raising issues of policy are discussed.

3s The present policy of the Political Adviser is to
encourage the national radio services to give greater emphasis
than hitherto to telling the Satellite peoples what is going
on in the outside world, and to keeping them in touch with
current trends of thought and development in the West.

(See the parallel policy of FEP - para 7 below). He wishes
to reduce the amount of time devoted to discussing the purely
domestic affairs of the Satellites, which audience research
has shewn to bore many listeners, and to eliminate as far as
possible the highly argumentative, written-up type of script
with no real substance in ite In view of the basic aim of
RFE stated in para 2 above and the organizational consequences
thereof, it may be some time before the Political Adviser's
“edvice" in this sense is fully reflected in radio programmes.

Organization

4 A chart of RFE is at Annex A. As mentioned, the Political
Adviser has a representative attached to each national seryice.
B&B paper on the important Evaluation and Research Section,

(head, Mr. Gedye) is attached at Annex B, ‘This Section
provides centralized intelligence, research and reference

facilities for all national services, and seemed tome

Lat
eles

 

 

 

 
=D ie

highly efficient. The national card indexes are remarkable
for the amount of information they contain. The Munich
representative of the FEP, which has its own separate
organization, maintains close touch with the national Desks
of RFE and depends upon them for advice and preparation of
certain material.

5s RFE has a network of representatives, interrogators and
correspondents in the field. They include a British
correspondent in Hamburg, Alexander Ramsay, who has good
relations with the German Red Gross and interviews ex-P.0.W.
repatriated from the Soviet Union for news of Satellite
nationals in Russia, (RFE Headguarters also recently sent a
circular letter on the same subject to repatriates returned

home under the agreement reached by Dr. Adenauer; it met

with a surprisingly good response). There are interrogation
centres for Bulgarian refugees in Athens, Salonika and Istanbgul.
Owing to its non-official status and employment of staff not
cleared for security, RFE is denied access to classified American
material and therefore largely depends upon its own resources,
news agencies, uma tke radio stations (RFE regularly monitors
the Satellite radio stations) and the press for information
about the Satellites.

6. The radio transmitters of RFE are mostly in Portugal, whither
the programmes are layéd by short wave. Owing to political and
technical difficulties RFE have, temporarily shelved their plan
for opening up transmitters etc. in Istamboul, largely for
broadcasting to Bulgaria.

Policy of Bree Europe Press

Te FEP aim to provide the Satellite countries to which they

send written material, mostly by balloon (though it has also been
sent by post on oceasion), with the equivalent of a free national
press. This goal is by no means unattainable, taking into

account the technical facilities now disposed of (see para 9 below).
Apart from occasional publicity "scoops" like the revelations

of Swiatlo, the senior officer of the Polish secret police, which
were printed in a special miniature 20-page booklet for sending by
balloon, it is FEP's present policy to concentrate upon sending in
large quantities a monthly "newspaper". Recently modified as
regards format and content, this now consists of a two page
pamphlet attractively got up with photographs, news, and views and
comment in the form of extracts from the Western, and predominantly
the European press. FEP are expanding their capacity to send
material by balloon still further in the hope and expectation that
it will soon no longer be considered an abnormal event in the
Satellites for products of the FEP to drop from the skies. When
this stage is reached, FEP will consider their battle half-won.

8. FEP send material by balloon to Czechoslovakia, Hungary and
Poland at present. They hope to extend the service eventually
to Roumania. In addition to pamphlets, they are toying with the
idea of sending special editions of suitable books. However the
"newspaper" has priority.

FEP ballooning

9. FEP have 5 balloon launching sites, connected by teleprinter
with a central meteorological section and command post in Munich.
While experimenting with larger balloons, they are at present

concentrating upon mass-launching of a type of constant-altitude
plastic balloon, the P.120, each of which carries 2 lbs. of ¥

 

 
 
 
 
 

as

printed material. The present launching capacity of the
Berchtesgaden site is 750 balloons of this type per hour.

This gives a combined launching capacity for all three sites
together of about 4% tons of literature per hour. Launching

to Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland can be carried on
consecutively for up to 14 hours in the winter months, if the
wind remains favourable. Coverage in the Satellites concerned
seems to be good. Release mechanisms are of a simple machanical
type to eliminate the possibility of injury to children etc.

in the Satellites, and a tripping device will shortly be generally
introduced whereby the balloon automatically reverses itself

and falls to earth after releasing its load, An advantage of
the P.120 plastic balloon is that it is too small and flimsy

to endanger aircraft.

10. RFE have an extensive system of reporting for audience
research purposes, and seem to have a very good idea of local |
reactions to their radio programmes and FEP literature.

Refugee reports and reactions of various kinds on the part of the
authorities form the basis of their research; letters from
people in the country provide a useful supplement.

Security

11. Neither RFE or FEP are secure organizations, and it is the
policy of both to conduct all their activities openly. Copies
of all RFE and FEP output are sent to the Gemnan authorities,

and close liaison is maintained with them @n such matters as
registration of staff; importation of printed matter and
equipment; guarding of the balloon=launching sites. The latter
have not yet been directly attacked, though a Ggech arrested in
November 1954, near a site in possession of arms and illegal
documents confessed to be reconnoitring for an attempt to destroy
the site.

   
  
    
  
 
 
   
   
    
  
   
   
  
 
    
  
    
  
 

Relations with the Germans

bees These are satisfactory and often cordial at the technical
level, satisfactory at the level of the Federal Government, less
than satisfactory in so far as the Bavarian State Government is
concerned. RFE is regularly attacked in the Bavarian Parliament.
It does what it can to avoid hostile criticism by exercising the
utmost discretion in handling topics of direct interest to Germans,
or which are political issues in Germany, such as the Oder/Neisse
line; and by pursuing the open-handed policy described in para 11
above. Dr. Adenauer recently granted a 5-year extension of

RYE's permit to operate, to their considerable satisfaction.

General Conclusion . ; a

 
 
  

  

135. Within its self-imposed limitations, RFE Bea ;
organization and is doing arc work. These ste ation

(a)> dts policy of granting a cone iderable ree of gutonony
to the five national radio serviées (paras 2 = Seeig Hs oa a

(b) its non-official status, Which denies toit the ‘numerous
adwantages enjoyed by American official organiza: \

(2)

its location in Germany .

    
e FOREIGN OFFICE,

CONFIDENTIAL LONDON, S.W.1,
PR 134/32 January 12, 1956

I enclose a copy of my report on my
recent visit to Radio Free Europe in Munich.
It is really a series of notes rather than
ai) comprehensive report; you may find some
items of interest. I am sorry that the carbon
copy is rather a dimone. A copy has also ;
gone to the Canadians.

(H.T.A. Overton)

W. Barcer Esq.,
H.M. Embassy,
Washington.
6 EVALUATION AND RESEARCH SECTION

* dramatic companies, and many other categoriés,./ These are mostly

[Feye)

The valuation and Research Section comprises the great store—
house of information/, sedulously garnered, checked, classified
and indexed day by day, year after year;jon which Prograpming
depends for most of the material on ade its programmes are
based. Tt has a total staff of 100 persons, of whom 48 work in
the Bvalustion and 42 in the Research and Library sub-section.
Ixperienced visitors acquainted with other, organizations engaged
in similar work constantly confirm that’ there is no other store
house of information about the countries behind the Tron Curtain
which can compare in the amount of processed material with RFE’s

Evaluation and Research Section.

The staff of the Evaluation sub-section are the watchdogs of the
oreanization, whose first, but by no means only duty it is, to
check the information which flows into this headquarters from
its field offices and other sources, and so to safeguard the

Programming staff against possible errors in the material provided for their use. The first source of Byaluation's material

    
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
  
 
 
    

is the sixteen field offices of Radio Free Burope, ‘some situated
close to the Tron Curtain, like the Austrian bureaus and the
Rerlin bureau, others at more remote places specially suited for
the collection of first hand information from visitors from
satellite countries such as the ports of Hamburg and Istanbul
and some in greater or lesser capitals like London, Paris or

Stockholm. It is these field offices which provide the most
live contacts with the population of what we call the “captive
nations" living in what we call our “target countries" - Poland,
Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Rumania and Rulgaria. This they do by
means of their "Reports," which reach RFE to the time of some—
thins like 1200 a month. These consist in the main of detailed
interviews with refugees, visitors from behind the Curtain such
as footballers, dancers, weight-lifters, musicians, members of

 

neutral in politics, but among them are numbers both of convince
anti-communists and of zealous partisans of the regime. Not all

‘ed
 

. at ee

LA these consciously furnish information to RFE, although some

o so. All but the most reliable communists are always spied
on abroad by police agents from their home countries, yet even
so, they inevitably make casual or deliberate contacts with the
nations of the countries visited. There must be a few items of
information which they let slip which are not sooner or later
culled by an active RFE reporter and sent by the bureau chief

in the form of an Evaluation Report. Other sources of informa-—
tion for these Reports are persons of similar or other categories who visit the target countries (and who are tracked down

on their return and invited to answer the questions of RFE re—porters,) and even employees of legations and communist organ—
izations abroad, some of whom, of course, deliberately supply
false information. A great many Reports illustrate the life

of the country in which the bureau is situated, and provide in—teresting but non-political feature material for our listeners. ‘]

It is with these Reports that the work of Evaluation begins.
When the Report arrives from the field - most often in the lan—
guage of the target country, so that none of the flavor of the
original material may be lost to Program writers through trans-—
lation - it goes to the appropriate Evaluation Section. An English summary and English subtitles supplied by the Field
Bureau give pretty full knowledge of the content of the Report
to American and other members of the staff who, of course, can—
not speak the languages of all the target countries in which
Reports are mainly written, as well as to the nationals of other
target countries. The "National Evaluators" proceed to analyze
the contents and index it under the appropriate titles of the
evaluation code, and to check its accuracy against the records
built up over a number of years. There are, of course, many
possibilities for errors to creep into Reports. The overstrung
refugee, or the emigrant filled with blind hatred of the regime,
is prone to exaggeration and inaccuracy. More than once a sup—
posed refugee has turned out to be an agent of the regime, deliberately planting false information. Others mislead through
an excessive desire to please their interviewers, or convince

   
  

 

 
8. experience. : i

 

 

The Evaluators work patiently through the Reports, checking P
them line by line against their accumulated knowledge. Apart
from factual checks, every Evaluator has to lead a double life Lay

- a physical one in Munich, an imaginative one in his own cap—

tive country, so that he can instinctively spot anything which

is at variance with the picture he has - and keeps fresh

through his work - of the country from which the fugitive, or ‘
visitor, has come. The factual basis at his disposal is enor—

mous.

Hungarian Evaluation, for example, with a staff today of two
Evaluators and three researchers, has built up a register of
56,000 individual or biographic ecards, and 20,000 "collective
cards,” which give a detailed breakdown of individual factories,
kolkhozes, Party units and so forth, from the top down to the
smallest cell. Among the personal cards are 180 devoted to star
performers - the top men and women of the regime whose movements
and actions are closely followed and recorded from day to day.
Other cards record price and wage developments, provide indexes,
not only to Reports from field offices, but also to recorded
material clipped from the press or from RFE's daily monitoring,
of the target and other countries‘ broadcasts. All these cards
facilitate the use of the extensive subject files containing
actual Reports, clippings and so forth.[ In Polish Evaluation
you will find 50,000 personal index cards and 30,000 on concerns ~
(of which 80-90 per cent of the total are covered,) Party organ
izations, towns and villages. The work here is done by two Lae

Evaluators, four researchers and three typists. | No name of a ie,
t P J

person, locality or enterprise appearing in any Report is ever at

passed in any Evaluation Section without the most careful check—
ing against these index cards, maps, gazetteers, telephone and’
street directories, guides, railway time tables and other off:

 

 
 

  
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   

®.. Polish Desk reads and clips 6 dailies, 26 periodicals, and
occasional copies of the provincial newspapers. Every Polish ;
town and many villages have their own folders. The subject
files amount to some 800. Some 200 "star" communists have special biographical files. Some 200-300 entries are made daily
in the Polish index cards.

 

The index cards in the Czechosloyak Desk amount to 48,000 personal and 26,000 subject cards, 6,000 town and village index
cards and 3000 price cards.] (No record has ever been made of
the number of entries on index cards, but, for the whole five
National Evaluation Desks, they probably run into millions.)

The two Evaluators and four researchers have to supply informa—
tion promptly to some 32 Czechoslovak Editors in the Programming
Department. The Labor Editor, for example, is supplied with
such details about a certain factory as production figures,
workers’ meetings, instances of mismanagement, names and records
of stakhanovites and anything else the Editor may request to
present a detailed and up-to-date picture of the concern. The
Economic Editor, on the other hand, may require to be informed
about the current moves of the State Planning Office, or about
the state of Plan fulfillment in different industrial sectors. ]
In Czechoslovak Evaluation, every day eight mevepapers are read,
clipped and the extracts carded? the same thing is done with |
radio monitoring reports, an average of ten field office Reports
checked, evaluated and prepared for publication and the Western
press studied and read: ] Ten to fourteen periodicals are read
and extracts made.

The Rumanian Evaluation Desk is on a much smaller scale than

those already considered, consisting only of one Evaluator, 7
one researcher and at times a part-time typist, with half-time.
assistance from a Rumanian Archives researcher. It processes
some 1,000 reports from field offices every year. Halt @ nae

1

 
 
    
 
 

s

Rumanian communist dailies, the exile press, monitoring reports
and Western newspapers,are culled for clippings which are in e
ed on about 25,000 file cards. Pry ;
 

 

 
   
   
  

2s. Bulgarian Evaluation Desk is over 20,000 personal gee 2
8,000 subject file cards. Though also much smaller than “the '
first three sections considered here/ = it has only one Evaluator
and two researchers, neither of whom can devote their whole (im
to Bulgarian affairs sjit checks about 1,200 Bulgarian reports —
from field offices annually, clips seven Bulgarian dailies and ¥
16 Bulgarian periodicals, in addition to some 30-50 typewritten
pages of monitoring per day, and items of Bulgarian news from
the world press.

 

In addition to the five target countries Evaluation Desks, there —

is a non-target desk in which an enormous amount of material be
about other communist and non-communist countries - among the .
former the USSR, Bast Germany and China, among the latter Italy if

and Greece - is registered and filed. / Owing to lack of person— "
nel, the non-target desk is run by a Bulgarian researcher who

can only devote from one to two hours daily to non-target work- ~—
- there can be no detailed analysis or evaluation proper of
this vast amount of interesting material, averaging TiS Reports
a month. Information collected from other sources — monitoring,
newspapers and news services - is also filed here, and the non- nay:
-target Reports are published just like the others for the in- mS
formation of editors. There are, of course, no personality or.

subject indexes nere. ) F .
é el a

The Research and Library sub*section of the Evaluation and Re- Efe
search Section also supplies Programming with background material
required by the editor-writers for the preparation of radio =
scripts. The section is.divided into three units: “Reference, :
Library and Research and a saa a total of 42 ae

ae | ae

4

   

and subject.
alone are classified and - olinpeds ‘The

a card index of important ee
 

_

e clippings of the Reference Unit, unlike these of Evaluation,
can be borrowed by editors and taken away to their own desks.
This, of course, entails a certain percentage of loss. The
material in the Evaluation Section must be consulted on the spot
and cannot be removed. This makes the Evaluation records com—
plete and permanent.)

The Library Unit handles the book collection and is also occu—
pied in routing out periodicals and newspapers. The Library
contains some 25,000 volumes, of which 15,000 are satellite
books and 10,000 Western books. Subscriptions to some 1,200
publications, of which 550 are satellite material and some 700
are Western material, are also handled by the Library. A total
of about 3,000 copies per month is routed through the Library

to the various editors.

The Research Unit is composed of 17 researchers: 5 Poles, 4
Czechoslovaks and 4 Hungarians, 1 Rumanian and 2 outside researchers, and one researcher engaged in the preparation of the
Western magazine digest. The researchers are contacted by editor-writers for background material and use both the newspaper
collection and the library for this purpose. The two outside
researchers collect material from various libraries and research

institutes.

At the head of Evaluation and Research is the Chief, Evaluation,
who is at the same time’Chief of the Research and Library sub-—
-section. He has an assistant chief, and a chief editor, who

is responsible for supervising the work of the various copy=
-readers and for editing the Weekly Information Letter, compiled
by the national Evaluators for the information of correspondents,
Programming and other departments. The section has a typing
pool with a staff of 10-11 persons, and a translation pool with
two Polish, two Czech and three Hungarian translators. Certain
categories of Reports, from the field have to be translated
automatically (with Priority) into English; others are specially
translated at the request of the Political Advisor, Programming
and others. The Chief of Evaluation selects as many other

 

 
 

  
   
   
 
   
 
    
  
 
   
  
 
   
   

interesting Reports as time allows for ‘translation in. ee
make them available to 411 language ita ore RR OEe ae ae

 

whatever their original language. He or his weal fe ne ee
the four daily policy meetings of all target countries except ;
Bulgaria, which does no Programming from Munich; a national i
Evaluator also attends the policy meeting of his country. |

The work of Evaluators and their staffs goes far beyond the
processing of Reports and the collection of information. It is
their job to help the programming desks to become really the
"Voice of Free Poland” etc., and for that purpose they are con=
stantly in touch with editors and poreey writers, not merely to
answer enquiries but to make suggest ons and offer special material. The same work from a slightly different angle, is done

by the Archives researchers, 30 | thet, alt * physically situat—

ed in Munich, the Voice of “cae Sa

     
 
  
    
  
  

so minutely, accurately and currently i
tents and purposes it might be speaking from  aoetefe were
Budapest not a captive capital. met ol

ane ee
MS “Or

’ eport got

140 stencilied copies of regular reports, and over 200 of certain
categories are issued - we call "Items." On receipt, the Reports
are entered in & ledger and passed to the Chief of Evaluation,
who runs quickly through them to establish special priorities

=i

and give a preliminary gael apices Within hale an hour or

 

a

Evaluators add an "Evaluation Conment” teers teh For th
fit of program editors. Some they reject as \
for other reasons$ some are held up and queries
pondents asking them to undertake further er
ject. Some, of insufficient inter 4
placed in background files. Ne
bf

ae

eet delicate Reports are issued for "Limited Distribution,” when
only some 18 numbered copies are issued, for information only,
not for use in broadcasting, the recipients being required to
burn them after perusal, having taken any notes they require. The
processed Reports are copy-read and thencome again to the Chief
Evaluator for scrutiny; they are sent by him to the Typing Pool
- some also to the Translation Pool. Finally the stencils are
again copy-read and the Items run off and issued. A great deal
of the time of national Evaluators is taken up by receiving out—
side visitors of various kinds, especially journalists and re—
resentatives of outside institutions, to whom they supply from
their subject files and card indexes, the information which these
persons require. Like the Archives researcher, they prepare on
requests from Programming or the Political Advisor papers on
special subjects, research into which may occupy one or-two Eval—
uators for up to a couple of weeks.

End

 
ORGANIZATION CHART
EUROPEAN DIVISIOn

FREE EUROPE

EUROPEAN

te I RECTOR POLITICAL ADVISOR
DEPUTY

PRESS 6 PUBL
OEPUTY

RELATIONS OFFI
STATION OPERATIONS AUDIENCE ANALYSIS |

ADMINISTRATIVE NEWS & INFORMATION
PT

SERVICES ECOCOA NAMING! DECI
CZECHOSLOVAK SCRIPT

GENERAL TECHNICAL EVALUATION
& MONITORING OESK CONTROL

ENGINEERING OPERATIONS RESEARCH

 

 

 

FISCAL
6

 

PAYROLL SECuRIUY
MUSIC

 

 

 

ADMINISTRATION MUNICH CENTRAL
UTILITIES STUDIOS
TECHN. SUPPLY NEWS DESK LIBRARY

 

 

BIBLIS
TRANSMITTER POLISH
DESK PRODUCTION
i,
RANSMITTER PROGRAM
ACTIVITIES

TAPE
LIBRARY

PERSONNEL COMMUNICATIONS

 

PURCHASING
6

SUPPLY
BULGARIAN
NEWS

SCHLEISSHEIM
& MOOSBURG
MONITORING

TECHNICAL
MON @ EVAL

WIRE
COMMUNICATIONS!

FEBRUARY 1955

 
