FROM

 

   
   

 

 

No. l
Nyce ole 3 {yt Rs Wo! fe

Dated f C —~C +~G AL Ps pee ele ea.

Received in be 4 - =) :
_ Registry— Pt ot Brfoar low rae. aA Doebungc..
References to former relevant rs

wa MINUTES

   
 
 
    
 

|
|
}
’

[Rion 2 Bea Sar 9 fa

 

of &

(How disposed of)

Seen Rae hae pes OAs mle
a]
cugnacseseseshanpoctssaasoneceosnsesszepensrosoe , ah Pete ha offen
RR a RE, ope G2.)

erences to later relevant papers

i ate On .. i ae

 
NATO-SHAPE OFFICERS' BRIEFING Finktr 7 A. ;
15 September 1955

 

0945 - 1000 Visitors arrive at RFE, proceed to Studio One.

nxt Ws

1000 = 1015 Coffee. py
1015 Welcome by Mr. Condon and outline of RFE... despa

mission and scope. oon
ES eer ee

, Ps |

1050 RFE Programming - Mr. Bell. ie ms
1115 Information Gathering - Mr. Michie.
1140 Information Evaluation - Mr, Heat. RICHTER
1200 Recess.
1215 RPE's Technical Facilities - Mr. Quinn.
1230 Free Europe Press Balloon Operations - Mr. Weaver.
1255 Adjourn for "Dutch" luncheon with RFE staff at

Chinese Tower Restaurant.
1425 Return to RFE, Studio One.
1430 Effectiveness of broadcasts and leaflets - Mr. Sorensen. :
1450 Questions and Answers.
1510 Tour of Studio Building.
1600 Visitors depart for Neubiberg.

 
  

 
  
  

  
 

orted by
FOR FREEDOM

O FREE EUROPE ceusavi

 

FACT SHEET

WHAT IS RFE?

Radio Free Europe is a division of the Free Europe Committee, Inc., an organization set up by
a group of private American citizens in 1949. Both the Committee and its striking arm, R.F.E.,
receive support from the Crusade for Freedom

Radio Free Europe is a network of five stations, utilizing 29 transmitters located in West Germany and Portugal. The five stations, which broadcast to Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Romania and Bulgaria, are aimed at a population of 70 million people, bringing them truth, hope
and encouragement to bolster their determination to shake off the Soviet yoke. R.F.E. givesthese
millions the facts and information with which they create their own “ People’s Opposition” to the
Communist regimes. It counters the Red campaign of confuse-and-divide, and it makes it difficult
for the Kremlin to integrate and consolidate its captive populations. Thus it is a deterrent to renewed Soviet aggression

Radio Free Europe has grown from a tiny 7% kilowatt mobile transmitter to its present size in a
short four years. It now broadcasts to Czechoslovakia alone a total of 20 hours a day.

R.F.E. EFFECTIVENESS

R.F_E.’s effectiveness is well-proven. The testimony of countless escapees proves it. Letters
mailed and smuggled through the Iron Curtain prove it. Soviet reaction and satellite attacks on
RFE. prove it. The Communist attacks, continuous and in great volume, clearly show that R.F.E.
has gotten under the skins of the Reds. Communist collaborators denounced over R.F.E. have
changed their names, reformed or attempted to conciliate the workers they terrorized -- that,

too, demonstrates the impact of R.F.E.’s “truthcasts”

JAMMING

R.F_E. gets through -- despite the fact that the Reds spend more money annually trying to jam
out Western broadcasts than R.F.E. spends transmitting them. In the constant effort to stay
ahead of the Red jammers, R.F.E.’s primary weapons are advanced engineering techniques and
professional know-how. A variety of methods frustrates the Red jammers. One of the most effective is the R.F.E. device of turning all of its transmitters onto one target for a certain period of
the day, making a sieve out of the Iron Curtain and generating a volume which makes jamming
ineffective

THE BALLOON OPERATION

Coordinated with R.F.E.'s broadcasts, Crusade for Freedom sends printed matter via balloons to
Czechoslovakia and Hungary as well. Millions of messages of truth are flown by balloon over the
Iron Curtain. The effectiveness of the balloon campaign can be gauged by the more than four
hundred radio-press attacks and official protests of the Communists. The balloon campaignstarted
two years ago.

/
 

CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM

The entire Free Europe Committee action program -- particularly R.F.E. -- gets added impetus
from the American people's support of the Crusade for Freedom drives. The people behind the
Iron Curtain know that they are hearing the expression of millions of private Americans whose
donations and assistance have helped R F.E. and the Free Europe Committee grow throughout
the past years

A REACTION FROM BEHIND THE IRON CURTAIN

Former Polish Air Force Lieutenant Franciszek Jarecki, who flew his MIG jet fighter to freedom
in March 1953, says: “Radio Free Europe is the favorite radio station in Poland, broadcasting
its programs throughout the day so everyone can listen. It gives us true information and enables
the people to understand the lies of Red propaganda. Its Voice of Free Poland considerably influences our decision of moral survival by answering so effectively the Communist propaganda
which constantly torments us.”

AN EXILE NETWORK

R.F.E.'s “Voice of Free Poland,” its “Voice of Free Czechoslovakia,” “ Voice of Free Hungary,”
“Voice of Free Romania” and “Voice of Free Bulgaria” are truly exile radio stations, reflecting
the views of democratic anti-Communist leaders who continue to fight for the freedom of their
homelands from R.F.F 's studios With American know-how to assist them, these exile leaders -educators, statesmen, journalists, clergymen, entertainers and many others -- have established

a network which enjoys the full trust of those enslaved by Communism

TYPICAL 8 F_E. PROGRAMS
Thumbnail sketches of typical R F E. programs follow:

Newscasts

Every hour on the hour. Each day closes with news headlines broadcast at dictation speed and a
half hour political commentary on the outstanding event of the day broadcast on “saturation service” to defeat jamming over twenty-three transmitters.

Political Commentaries

Usually follow news broadcasts. Commentaries cover both international news and “local developments of special interest to Czechoslovaks interpreted by informed and respected exiles.

Program Previews

Six times daily immediately preceding the news. The equivalent of radio listings in newspapers.

The Other Side of the Coin

Daily analysis of regime propaganda based upon up-to-the minute monitoring of Czechoslovak
radio and research of regime newspapers, designed to nail the lies of the Communists. Sometimes
coniments on news less than ten minutes after it has been announced by Radio Prague. Written
between eight and eleven pm, this program is broadcast first late in the evening and repeated
periodically throughout the next day

Religious Services

Live broadeasts direct from churches with nationality congregations as well as studio broadcasts
for Catholic, Protestant and Jewish faiths

Messages

Daily survival program in two parts: the first, an expose of Communist informers and officials who

 
bd 3


exploit the people and endanger the security of the individual; the second part. coded messages
from escapees back to their friends and relatives.

To the Farmer

A daily agricultural program for the farm family. Sometimes a husband and wife discussion. Comments on farming conditions within the specific country and reports on news of agriculture in the
Western world and the nations within the Soviet bloc

Labor Program

Daily, sometimes in dialogue, sometimes in dramatic form. Prepared by leaders of labor groups
now in exile and trained radio writers. Reports on progress of labor in the free world as well as
conditions within the Soviet bloc.

Fighting Church

Prominent church leaders in exile speak to their people bringing them not only hope for the future,
but constructive advice for the present. Programs such as “Fighting Church” strive to help parents instill religious values in their children and maintain their own faith and worship in an atheistic state

Tuesday with Joe

Musical variety show to Czechoslovakia featuring the original songs of composer-pianist Joe
Stelibsky, one of Czechoslovakia's best known tunesmiths, now in exile.Features non-political
popular music as well as original songs satirizing current events in Czechoslovakia.

Lurope without the lron Curtain

Advises listeners of developments in the movement for a federated Europe. Prepares them for
the Europe of which they may be a part in the event of liberation Features interviews with individuals prominent in the European community and on-the-spot coverage of important conferences.

Music

Two. forty minute periods of music daily - symphony. opera, light classics and folk songs. Stress
is placed on traditional national music which is suppressed or distorted by the Communists.

Youth Program

ltegular daily time segments are consistently devoted to programs for young people. Round table
discussions, radio dramas, news about scouting, sports, camping and international youth organizations are featured. Young people are counseled on survival without submission to the regime
and urged to think, read and develop their judgment.

Women's Program

Daily, devoted to the role of woman and the family under Communism. News of fashion, food and
women’s activities both in the West and within the specific country is reported. Famous women
in exile are interviewed. Teen-age girls addressed once a week

The American Woman at work

Four part series of programs describing the place of American women in the working world, the
careers open to them, the conditions of work, integration of careers and marriage, etc.

Parents, Take Care of Your Children

Urges parents to capitalize on the holiday months when their children are more often at home by
leading them in democratic ways. Gives specific advice for combatting the effect of Communist
indoctrination on a child's thinking.

Polish Tea Party

A variety, satirical program patterned after a pre-war Polish program;*Katjus”, a simple but
crafty peasant boy, and his“ Aunt’ a funny gossipy old woman, and a large cast spoof the

 
e ‘

Communist regime in Poland with laughter and song Theme song “Let Us Be Gas,” reported to
be so popular that it is whistled on the streets and sung by laborers travelling to work. “Hungarian Light Varieties’ and ‘‘Kohout’s Kabaret” are its counterparts to Hungary and Czechoslovakia

Calling the Communist Party

Daily show addressed to party members. Spreads doubt and dissension insid) ih p rty Aims to
demoralize Communist officials and paralyze the functions of the Party

1 Chose Freedom

Interviews with refugees usually recorded by RFE reporters at D P. camps in Germany. Escapees
describe conditions leading to their flight and their reception in the West

Round Table Discussion

\d lib airing of opinions on important events in the news by authoritative pedple and RFE news
editors

Kohout’s Kabaret

Variety. satirical show featuring Jara Kohout, a comedian. singer. and movie actor well-known
in Czechoslovakia. Weapons of wit and music effectively employed against the Communist regime

Between Two Cogwheels

Hungarian dramatic show poimting out the weaknesses and meadacits of Communism through personul stones

lroctors Talk it Over
Medical program written by doctors and demonstrating the advances of sciences inthe free Western world as opposed to the inadequacies of health and medical facilities in Communist countries.

Inside USA

Describes the people and forces that have shaped America Designed to illustrate concretely how
the principles of democracy and freedon) have been forces in creating the high technological,
economic and humanitarian standards of U.S

How to Survive

Constructive advice on how to live, develop mental judgment, prepare for the future and avoid
trouble from the Communist regime

Children's Program

Games, fairy tales, dramas and songs for children. Non-political but designed to develop moral
values and sustain national traditions

Date with Eva

Non-political dise jockey program featuring American jazz and popular music.

To the Army

Talks to military personnel and their families. Features interviews with army defectionists whenever possible. Emphasis on the strength of the free world. Shows the captive people how Communist leaders plan to exploit CS army for Soviet purposes

We Accuse

Case histories of specific communists who are known to be particularly cruel in exploiting the
people. Accuses them by name, lists their misdeeds, and warns them that retribution is sure unless their ways change

Father Speaks to Son
Exile in America speaks weekly to his son who is 2 functionary of the government and a member

 
 

of the Workers’ Party. Comments on world events, and on a personal man-to-man basis point out
the weakness of Communism

Science and Invention

Points out the advancement of science in the free world and emphasizes its strength.

Through the Capitol Window
First hand report from Washington.

Crechs and Slovaks in the Best

Describes the life and experiences of exiles living in the West. On the spot reportage by RFE
reporters. Aims to strengthen ties of Czechoslovakians with the free world

Sports Column

World sports developments with emphasis when possible, on exile performers

Play of the Week

Dramatization by RFE radio actors of an important play, usually one that is being performed cur
rently in Europe or in the United States

Cultural Program

Sustains native cultures which Russians try to destroy or distort

How it Really Happened
Objective history lessons pointing out distortions and omissions in Communist history text books

Belief and the World
Religious program showing the strength of spiritual values and their influence on the world

ABC of Democracy

Description of the way democracy and democratic institutions develop and operate both in the
U.S. and elsewhere

Questions from Home

Replies to questions in letters received from behind the Iron Curtain. Spot announcements on RFE
inform listeners of the changing and anonymous box number to which mail may be addressed

Movies

Reviews of important Western films sometimes including music from film. A link with the Western
world and pre-Communist days when American films and movie stars were popular in Eastern and
Central Europe

Book of the Week
Review of a significant novel, biography, or political book.

The Poet's Corner
Sunday afternoon interlude of poetry and music designed for relaxation and reflection
RADIO FREE EUROPE
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT

HISTORY & DESCRIPTION OF
TECHNICAL FACILITIES

TRANSMITTER FACILITIES

Target Transmitters

Radio Free Europe started its operation on July 4th, 1950, in the
woods of Lampertheim, near Frankfurt, Germany. A mobile 7,500 watt
short wave transmitter housed in seven trailer vans was first employed.
All program material was at that time prepared in the New York studios
and flown into Germany on a daily basis. Shortly thereafter a permanent
installation was started to replace the mobile unit. At the same time
two additional installations were begun. Holzkirchen 135,000 watt medium
wave and two 10,000 watt short wave went into operation in May, 1951, and
Biblis two 10,000 watt short wave in July, 1951. One month later the
mobile 7,500 watt Lampertheim transmitter (affectionately nicknamed
"Barbara") was transported to Lisbon, where it again resumed broadcasting
to the target countries. Munich was chosen for the studio and head—
quarters' site because of its central location.

Germany was selected for the first RFE transmitting site because
of its proximity to satellite coumtries, in that one hop transmission
(which gives the least amount of signal attenuation) could be obtained
to the target via the short waves. It was limited, however, on short
wave to the 49.41 and 31 meter bands. Medium wave signals are ideal
from Germany. In order to use the higher frequencies, Lisbon was sel—
ected as it was propagationally ideal for the 25, 19 and 16 meter bands.
This, then, gave RFE one hop transmission coverage in all of the inter—
national short wave broadcast bands, as well as medium wave, to all
target areas. Each of the above installations have since grown in
number of transmitter units, power output and antennas. (RFE Technical
Facilities Chart).

gr
Relay Transmitters to Lisbon

In the USA, radio stations or networks such as RFE, are linked
together by program lines supplied by the Bell Telephone System.
However, in Europe such facilities are not available in all areas.
While they are available in Germany itself, there are no program lines
through Spain to Portugal. RFE had therefore to devise a system whereby its programs could be sent by radio to the Lisbon installation. At
Holzkirchen six 10,000 watt transmitters were installed which beam programs
to the Lisbon receiver site, whereby they are received on triple diversity
receiving apparatus and go out again from the Lisbon transmitters back to
the target countries. In order to obtain the best results over the relay,
in case of either jamming or poor propagation conditions, programs from
the three main language desks are sent over two transmitters each. In
other words, the six relay transmitters are split up into three groups of
two. ‘The best transmission of the two in any language group is selected
for rebroadcast. When one of the transmissions becomes jammed, Lisbon
then requests Holzkirchen to change that particular language transmitter
to clear frequency, where once again the program is continued. As many
as eighty-four frequency changes are made per day on these six transmitters
to maintain the best reception conditions. (RFE Physical and Technical
Facilities Operational Chart).

Methods of Combatting Jamming

RFE decided initially that the best method to combat jamming was by
quantity or numbers of transmitting stations, rather than by fewer stations
of higher power, since it was obvious that the Opposition did not have sufficient jammer transmitters to adequately cover the already existing services
broadcasting into Soviet controlled territories. For this reason, if their
jamming efforts could be kept behind actual requirements (that is, lacking
a sufficient number of jammers to go around), then RFE's chances of inter
ference-free transmissions would be increased. This also permits the use
of several international bands for each language desk similtaneously. If
one wave-length is jammed the listener then has a choice of several bands
(for example, 49, 41, 31, 25 and 19 meter bands). This is the theory on
which RFE built. The theory remains valid to this day, except in cases
where increasing the number of transmitting stations in a given area is no
longer feasible, due to frequency or wave-length limitations which prohibit
further expansion. In this case the only alternative is to find locations
where wave-lengths are available, or to increase the power of existing radio
transmitters, in order to maintain its lead over the Opposition's efforts.

RFE is also striving to increase the power of its existing technical
facilities insofar as economically possible.
RADIO STATION

Biblis 1
Biblis 2
Biblis 3
Biblis 4
Biblis 5
Biblis 6
Biblis 7
Biblis 8
Biblis 9

Holzkirchen MWT

RFE TECHNICAL FACILITIES CHART

POWER

20,000 watts
50,000 watts
50,000 watts
50,000 watts
10,000 watts
10,000 watts
10,000 watts
10,000 watts

3,000 watts

135,000 watts

(medium-wave trans
nitter)
Holzkirchen 1

Holzkirchen 2
Holzkirchen 3
Holzkirchen 4
Holzkirchen 5
Holzkirchen 6
Holzkirchen 7

Cham MB-50

Lisbon 1
Lisbon 2
Lisbon 3
Lisbon 4
Lisbon 5
Lisbon 6
Lisbon 7
Lisbon 8
Lisbon 9
Lisbon 10
Lisbon 11
Lisbon 12
Lisbon 13
Lisbon 14

(Figures are as of today - they are subject to change)

Apr. 28, 1955

10,000 watts

10,000 watts
10,000 watts
10,000 watts
10,000 watts
10,000 watts

3,000 watts

50,000 watts

50,000 watts
50,000 watts
50,000 watts
50,000 watts
50,000 watts
50,000 watts
50,000 watts
50,000 watts
100,000 watts
100,000 watts
100,000 watts
100,000 watts
7,500 watts
3,000 watts

BROADCAST TO

Czechoslovakia
Poland

Hungary

Poland

Hungary
Hungary

Poland
Czechoslovakia

Cue transmitter only

Czechoslovakia

Relay transmitter to

Lisbon

Cue transmitter to

Lisbon
Czechoslovakia

Czechoslovakia
Poland

Poland
Czechoslovakia

Hungary
Czechoslovakia
Czechoslovakia

Cue transmitter to

Munich only

 

1 Dec.

1 Jan.
1 Dec.
1 Dec,
25 Jan.
25 Jan.
29 Sept

2 Dec.

25 Dec.
25 Dec.
27 Mar.
27 Mar.
1 Nov.
1 Nov.
12 Dec.
1 Jan.
24 Dec.
25 Dec.
24 Feb.

24. Feb. 54
3 duly 51
54

21 Sep.

54

 
RFE MONITORING

The Monitoring Section, one part of the News and Information Service,
constitutes the ears of RFE's Program Desks. By listening tc the home transmissions of radio stations behind the Iron Curtain - that is, the broadcasts
which the Communist regimes beam to their own people - RFE gleans a great
deal of information about the internal situation of the satellite countries,
the propaganda tactics of the Commmists and, by reading between. the lines,
the reaction of the people.

Information acquired in this way and combined with refugee reports gathered
by RFE correspondents stationed along the western side of the Iron Curtain
affords quite a comprehensive picture of conditions in the East. In addition,
much valuable material is picked up mechanically by Morse and Hellechreiber*
from the Eastern European wire services in English, French, and other languages
(Tass, CTK, PAP, MTI, ADN, Tanyug, Agerpress, BTA, and ATA), which combines
with the aural monitoring to form the grist of the mill for Program Desks,

It is one of the wonders of American engineering that in addition to their
propaganda beamed abroad, we are able to hear so many of the self-revealing
local broadcasts, because in most cases the Curtain stations are not concerned
with reaching beyond their own borders - whereas American equipment and techniques
have enabled us to "pull in" stations from great distances. This is of high
importance just because the local flavor of these broadcasts spell something to
the exiles who are working in Munich formating the free world’s answer to them.

At present 35 Curtain stations are monitored regularly, 4 to 6 others on
spot basis. In the course of a week twelve languages will be used. The daily
intake by aural monitoring runs between 45,000 and 48,000 words, On some heavy
days the total monitoring intake (including news services, monitored mechanically) will rum better than 200,000 words. In any service this is an extremely
heavy volume, However, when it is considered that the bulk of this material is
highly specialized, dealing with specific targets, it can be seen that this great
volume is necessary, in order to keep fresh the highly diversified fielda of
programming. We suffer periods of strangulation when atmospherics cut off one
country or another, and the fact. that we have a good cushion of wordage to fall
back on enables the desks, through close cross-reporting, to weather the setbacks.

As Radio Free Europe comprises actually five radio stations in one, so the
Monitoring Section, which employs 51 persons, is broken down into nine sub-sections
according to the country monitored:

 

* A NOTE ABOUT THE HELLSCHREIBER:

The Hellschreiber is little known outside Europe. It is a short-wave and longwave transmitting and receiving system at slow speed, and can be copied over
great distances. It is, perhaps, a forerunner of radio-teletype.

The fact that most of the satellites use Hellschreiber for at least part of their
news transmission is a windfall for RFE, for it means that we can have mich of
their news output as soon as, or even before their own newspapers. The Hellschreiber enables RFE editors to dissect the satellites’ news budget and be on™
the air with our answers to it often before it has appeared in the local presse.

(more)

 
1. The three major monitored sub-sections - Czech-Slovak, Hungarian, and
Polish - supply three major program Desks with news, political commentaries, dramatic programs, economic and labor reports, etc. = in short.
all types of material which can be used for full~feature programs. One
of the most successful types of program is that which makes direct
answer to false statements and misleading information from the Communist
radio, such as the Polish and Czechoslovak "The Other Side of the Coin"
and the Hungarian "Reflector" programs. Such programs as these are
based almost exclusively upon monitoring reports.

2. The Romanian and Bulgarian Monitoring sub-sections supply mich the same
sort of material to their respective program desks, though on a somewhat
smaller scale. They also supply supplementary material to the three
major desks, who keep a weather eye out for significant developments in
all other satellites.

3. More collateral information is provided by the Russian, Serbo-Croat,
Albanian, and East-German sub-sections. The Russian sub-section keeps
up with daily broadcasts of Radio Moscow, including the daily PRAVDA
editorial, which sets the pattern for the day's journalistic line in the
satellite press, . The East-German sub-section has been operating at full
strength since the June 17, 1953 revolt in the East Zone. As the show~
window of Commmist activity and policy, East Germany: is watched attentively by all bay radio desks of a

 

The Monitoring Sectdbad épvers the red roaddnote from 0500 hours to 0100 hours
the following morning, Peaképeration hours are in the early morning, when most
of the satellite regime editobials for the day are broadcast, and the evening hours.
A broad schedule such as this’ is covered by means of shift work and tape recordings,
the latter also serving as a means for covering simltaneous programs from the same
country. Frequently, important events, such as emt Party congresses, stc.,
require overtime work.

"Rotation" for Speed  paleseinl "rotation" system for speedy handling of important speeches was worked out by the Hungarian sub-section. By transcribing the
speech in relay styles, 15 minutes at a time, the firet monitor is able to finish
and rush to the editors the first quarter hour of the program in time to pick up
the fifth quarter hour; he) ®Becond monitor takes the second and sixth quarter hours;
and so on. In this way, the éditors and translators have the whole speech only
mimites after the end of the ybroadoast.

In order to have the closest possible liaison with the working desks, three
sub-sections (Check ail.ovaky Ringarian and Polish) are located on the second floor
of the Inglish Garden » receiving their programs piped in from the re~
ceiving stations. From a ral panel in the Monitoring rooms these signals are
relayed to the desired acpsbeastars, where the monitors may listen direotly to the
program while it is being recorded on tape. Lines may also be "patched" from the
monitoring room panel directly into conference rooms of the corresponding Program
Desks, enabling members of the Czechoslovak Desk, for example, to listen in to a
round table on economics from Radio Prague and to go on the air immediately after
wards with their own round table. of comment and analysis.

In all operations the’ monitoring sub-sections are geared to the speedies$
possible distribution of the fiews. On occasion, RFE has been able to acoop both 3
the West and the Bast. For example, in the case of Stalin's death, tha Beria purge,

 
and Malenkov's resignation, RFE picked up the news from TASS and broadcast it

to the satellite countries as much as two hours before Moscow ammounced it to
them. In the case of the illness of Gottwald, former Presidemt of Czechoslovakia, in 1953, RFE scooped the West press by as much as three hours, having
received the news directly from Radio Prague. Routine news bulletins reach key
persons on each desk within minutes after they are received ~- in the form of
carbon copies of the monitor's transcription. The original, a ditto stencil, is
then run off end distributed (in the original language) to various departments
upon request. Several copies of each go by air express to New York daily.

In addition to the original language Monitoring, which covers verbatim all
programs which are monitored, the respective monitoring sub-sections publish a
daily English summary of the iionitored news. Known as the Monitoring Highlights,
this summary goes to all Desks, Amounting to 5,000-7,000 words, it is also sent
daily over a low-cost, leased radio-teletype circuit to the New York RFE office,
where it forms the basis for discussion at New York's morning meetings. This is
important, as it keeps New York in hour-to-hour touch with the pattern of Curtain
developments. Needless to say, the Highlights, being published in English, are
invaluable for cross-reporting among the various different language desks. ‘They
form, for instance, ane of the few ways in which the Polish Desk keeps in teuch
with events in Hungary.

One of the fascinating facets of Monitoring is the human eide. At present,
some 40 exiles from Curtain countries are working side by side with Americans and
Germans. They travel on “Stateless” passports and have found second homes in
many different countries, Germany, France, Switzerland, England and Itely. Despite
tremendous language barriers in the beginning, they have been mit into a smoothrunning organization, German is the chief language of inter-commmnication, and
many now speak English,

There has been a very satisfying development of language talent among the
monitors. Many have attended English or German classes on their own and where
they have shown interest and ability, the Americans in the Monitoring Section
have worked with them to improve their Mnglish, against the time when they may
emigrate. A practical by-product of this has been the development of translation
talent, so that at present it is possible to get practically any Curtain language
into either German or English quickly for more efficient use by more RFE departments, Also, within the section itself a great deal of interchangeability bas
been developed. It is not hard for a Slovak to understand the Czech lenguage and
vice versa. Bulgarian and Russian, though presenting some difficulties, usually
can be teamed up; Yugoslave can help in both of these languages, while we do have
one Rumanian who knows Serbo-Croat and one Albanian who can do both Serbo-Croet and
German,

The great value of monitored voice broadcasts from behind ths Iron Curtain is
that they give a day-to-day picture of life in the Curtain countries, which would
never emerge from the satellite propaganda broadcasts beamed abroad. Set against
the background of the personal experience of the national editors, these domestic
broadcasts acquire a special significance to them and form the basic raw materials
of the programs which they write for broadcast by BFE.

et

 
EFFECTIVENESS OF RADIO FREE EUROPE

When all is said and done about the facilities, the policies and
the broadcasts of Radio Free Europe, the ultimate question remains:
Are the programs reaching the hearts and minds of people behind the
Iron Curtain?

It is not enough to command the ears of a large audience; the crux
of "effectiveness" is the ability to influence the actions, as well as
the thinking of the listeners. In other words: Is Radio Free Europe
winning friends for the West and for the cause of freedom, and undermining the authoritarian grip of the Kremlin and its puppet
in Eastern Europe?

There is no simple, absolute answer to this question. Psychological
warfare is not an isolated phenomenon, but is interwoven\with the
political, economic and military components of the Cold War between the
Free West and the Kremlin, Its ultimate success therefore is linked
with the outcome of all other Cold War activities. Furthermore, public
opinion polls are not yet sanctioned behind the Iron Curtain — hence,
not even the approximate findings that may be derived from such polls
are available.

In the face of these limitations in evaluating Radio Free Europe's
effectiveness, there is a mounting body of direct and circumstancial
evidence indicating that RFE programs are influencing the thinking and
the actions of the captive peoples, and of the Commmist regimes themselves, Although much of this evidence is accumlated, correlated and
analyzed by RFE itself, a good deal of it is obtained from outside
sources, such as BBC's skilled analysts who evaluate the impact of
international broadcasts.

This evidence of effectiveness is manifested in the following ways:
1) letters from behind the Iron Curtain. 2) Reports from escapees
from satellite countries. 4) Communist measures to frighten and frustrate
the listening audience. 4) The contents of official Commmist reports,.
designed not for propaganda purposes but for internal Party use.
5) Commmist propaganda attacks against RFE. 6) Official regime
protests against RFE operations. 7) Positive action by the regimes
resulting from pressure by RFE broadcasts. 8) Positive actions by the
people themselves as a result of specific RFE campaigns.

A brief explanation of each of these evidences of program effective—
ness follows:

1) Hundreds of letters from RFE's target countries are received
annually from workers, peasants, teachers, students, housewives, intellec—
tuals, shopkeepers, young people and even members of the Party, the police
and armed forces. Some letters are channeled through the regular mails,

 

 
 

Some are smuggled out. Many letters include detailed analyses of RFE
programs, proving that Commmist jamming efforts have not been able to
drown out RFE programs, which are repeated several times over miltiple
transmitters of both the short and medium wave type. A recent letter
of the many received from Czechoslovakia stated: "I want to express
thanks and praise to all exiles for their words of encouragement through
Radio Free Europe, inspiring millions of our citizens to continue resistance to the Commmist regime and hope for a better future. Practically every child can tell you that entire families listen to the programs.
This is because you are not promising paradise on the earth, because you
are not lying and because all your words are truthful and such that
every honest Czech and Slovak feels them in his’ h an

2) Escapees consistently report that RFE is piercing Communist
jamming and that the programs are widely heard and given extensive wordof-mouth circulation. Interviews with refugees - which are conducted as
scientifically as possible in order to separate fact from fiction - reveal
that the satellite people depend on RFE as their point of contact with
the free world and their countrymen now living in the West. The Polish
Airforce pilot, Franciszek Jarecki, who flew his jet plane to West Germany,
made the following statement: "There are three things the Communists
camnot kill: what mother said about God and Poland, what one's own heart
dictates and what Radio Free Europe tells us."

 

3) The regimes have devised many ways to discourage radio listenership - though tuning in on Western broadcasts is not officially a crime.
In Hungarian communities, for example, the Communists have recruited
"listening couples" with instructions to drop in on neighbors unexpectedly
and report if they are listening to Western broadcasts - especially RFE.
In some commmities, family dogs were seized by local authorities (on the
pretext of canine disease epidemics) because the dogs interfered with the
spying of the “listening couples" by barking warnings of their arrival.

4) Official Commmist reports stress the danger of RFE to the regimes.
One report, prepared by the Hungarian Minister of Defense, stated: "The
most dangerous effect of Radio Free Europe is that it results not in
organized resistance, which is easily detected and supressed, but in
atomized resistance which is more difficult to control. For example, a
Radio Free Europe program recently compared the situation in Hungary to
a former despotic era: "the effect of broadcasts of this kind is that they
ereate resistance among Hungarian soldiers to the Army's Russification ’ »

program." 4

Sometimes unofficial but equally authentic reports of this nature reach RFE. For example, a high official in the Polish Communist government, 3
in a personal conversation in the West that he never dreamed would be :
repeated, said: Radio Free Europe is accomplishing the work of the opposi~ ae
tion in Poland. It is the mortal enemy of the regime, which would offer
any amount of money if it could persuade them to abolish this radio station." ;

 
-3
Another Polish official revealed RFE's extensive "word-of-mouth" circulation A

by the following statement at a Department of Propaganda and Agitation nie
meeting: "One radio set in each village is quite sufficient to poison the a
peasants! minds with (Western) calumies and lies.” a

5. A cardinal rule of psychological warfare is not to dignify or A.
advertise hostile propaganda by replying to it. The Commmist regimes (and
Moscow as well) have consistently broken this rule in regard to Radio Free

Europe. In doing so, they have become RFE's best publicity agents. During $8
the past year, the Czechoslovak regime in particular has gone beyond its d
usual frantic invective against RFE; it now quotes programs, in substance . a

and in depth, then tries to refute them in an effort to minimize their
impact. Meanwhile, the anti-RFE vitriol poured out by Commmist radio
stations, newspapers, magazines and speechmakers continues. Here are a

few typical lines from a recent article in Rude Pravo, the official Commmist
organ in Prague:

"On the waves of the American ‘Free Europe! a former (Czech) leader was
heard lately. This time he tried, as much as his worn-out strength per—
mitted, to 'prove' that a peaceful co-existence of the countries of the
Socialist and Communist camp is absolute nonsense... Yes, that is the way the
refugee gang talk from their American and Munich dens. For a few dirty dollars,
they talk like Hitler, and Mussolini, the language of the Wall Street armament
manufacturers... The ground is collapsing under these traitors' feet... However,
our people as well as all the nations of the whole world are longing for peace,
and fight for peace. A handful of nobodys won't spoil our victory, even though
they howl with wolves for their Judas money." f

The frequency of these attacks is illustrated in statistics on attacks
by Czechoslovak propaganda organs from April through September, 1954. During
this period, Radio Free Europe was the subject of more than 400 direct attacks p
(not including reprints and rebroadcasts) as against 49 attacks directed against F
other Western broadcasters. More than 100 radio attacks along by Czechoslovak
stations were heard in September. In many cases, regime campaigns against RFE
are spearheaded by instructions from Moscow. :

6) Almost from its birth, Radio Free Europe has been the target of
official protests by the satellite regimes to the U.S. Govermment. Shortly
after RFE's "Voice of Free Czechoslovakia" went on the air, in May 1951, the
Czechoslovak regime violently protested the existence of RFE to the U.S. State
Department. The demand to extinguish RFE (which was firmly rejected by our
government) is apparently a measure of the regimes' fear of RFE, and an indi- i
cation that RFE is reaching the people. ;

 
>)

   

7) There is considerable evidence that the programs have forced the
regimes to take specific steps to protect themselves against the anger of
the people. On several occasions RFE has exposed sub-human living conditions
in prisons and slave labor camps; in many of these cases, regime officials
felt obliged to improve conditions, and brutal guards (either through fear
or honest shame) have improved their behavior. Amother type of RFE "denuncia—
tory" program is that which exposes the identities of Communist secret agents
and informers. RFE has later received first hand information from refugees .
to the effect that regimes have been forced to dismiss those exposed by RFE
(or transfer them to other regions) as their activities were rendered useless,
and they became objects of possible violence,

8) Possibly the ultimate test of "effectiveness" of propaganda is its
ability to influence the actions of its listeners. In this respect RFE is
simply a catalyst, giving its listeners the true facts and the moral strength
to enable them to act in accordance with their local needs and desires. An
example of a broadcasting campaign that resulted in concrete action by the
people was initiated to Hungary in July 1953, when RFE set out to help the
Hungarian peasants win concessions from the regime so they might improve
their living conditions, while weakening the Communists' power. In the
following six months, almost 50% of the peasants on Hungarian collectives
abandoned the state farms and returned to private farming. The blame for
this mass action was put squarely on RFS's shoulders by both the Prime Minister
of Hungary and the First Secretary of the Commmnist Party.

In the face of this body of evidence regarding the effectiveness of its
broadcasts, Radio Free Europe is fully aware that psychological warfare is
only one facet of the Cold War against Communism, Only through joint action
by the world's free nations - in the spheres of political, economic and
military cooperation as well as on the propaganda front - can Commmism be
stopped, short of war.

It is within this framework of joint action on a global scale that Radio
Free Europe has attempted to develop an effective and dynamic weapon in the
struggle to restore man's dignity and freedom where the curtain of Soviet
darkness has fallen,

  

Se nee se

 

 
 

 

The spoken

and printed word
penetrate

the Iron Curtain
in combined

operations
=
COM BINED OPERATIONS mails aS OPERATION “VETO” SVOBODNA J EvnoPA

 

 

repec ose

 

 

 

    

   

      
   

   

   

 

         

       

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

re - er
i k 1 ya | > E { the broad t fa F
y, 19. ned th 1 | it ct k f
transmitters eame turation 1 Nena as h + cluding sor spe ‘ n
L \ =
t Radio « spoken word and the “winds of t c i RFE
West ¢ - t k 000 ) reedom” carry the printed word across the tron concent t n Or t t th
lets Wered dow . panes Curtain, from the tree world to the peoples of FE programs to ( t k : tained ¢ 1 Pirst copy of the #-page airborne
jet t y t - Communist-dominated Czechoslovakia and Hungary ask With Teafiet ; ' he tt periodical Europe”, sent
th the im tai (Boundaries are de facto frontiers as they exist today.) ‘ = AguPelh to Cred In Crech and
js 7 - . J PETBNES) OF I Slovak it sets forth the Ten De
v dence that 1 th content and t c ngs t been comy mands of the People's Opposition
ra f ig et un broadcast cam; 1 nce trod
litical warfare That st i the rac losely is « m the frequer
‘ ; , : ! against tion and the attempt \ n of RFE p r
Mi = gaia : os v T f has am ha trodu rf i] t t 5
je 2 ‘4 2 y ed tt t r F s} c ag) S “ina E p
c t f wo plus tw Free E livered h in 000,000 airborne ed St flet
: : - t vA pinning 9 Fr urope introduced new aspects of the al! gummed poste ave i c 1
monk . ; . perattans have subsequently ste sly stec h 5 he doors of
slovakia Hung kt " ns in Prague; polit ¢ lam red d etalk functiona E M i¢
The nd ying conce t 7
se ie esi i end of August the number of leaflets reached a t { 41,000,000, d the th maj
: : i pene & regions of Bohemia, Moravia and Slovakia (see diagram { f pe t T eight of
: is cation) to Break rc The strategic plan of Operation ‘Vet bold and n but f ful analy
nd urope tinted word t { f + 1 th "i
ea nity \the Cres ie or MAY—AUGUST 1954 ! 1 ¢ :
F nt with tangit ¥ tt f Mare: Briefly stated it t r
detailed legal adv n how to exercise | Ostrava ‘ astrations, the East Germa
} stot nsia tt S )
all sign ted, bot definite shift
e ¢ m Part and t t casa
ty k and underpaid w collar classe
per ¢ f Crect ak collective fa
t n sl wa s which the regim
| t bef
Operation "V vegan. The purpose of th
{io-leaflet action has | to give for
Number of ac 5 ttaina’ 2
attacks rai

   

Vulnerability of Czechoslovak Communist regime to new approach to

RFE transmitters at Holzkirchen, RFE’s Voice of Free

  

   
     

  

Crechostovakla and Voice of Free Hungary employ Aeguat, 1955, there were 34 kaowm altecks on Unc otoes Shean

more than 150 announcers, script writers, political Long-range balloons bound for Hungary with mes Free Europe Committee and ts subsidiary operations. mut thods are

analysts and translators. Each broadcasts 20 program sages sciting forth the “Twelve Demands of the During the corresponding period a year later there sent purpo: tt
hours each day National Opposition Movement were 155 separate attacks on Operation Veto by restorin: .

   
agriculture and free trade unions, by forcing
through reductions in agricultural delivery
quotas and industrial work norms, by restoring
some degree of local autonomy and self-government. Operation “Veto” does not instruct the
Czechoslovak People’s Opposition, it suggests
specific, limited goals. It does not counsel the
use of violent methods, but asks the Czech and
Slovak people to work for the 10 Demands
without endangering themselves, in the ways
they know best

The reaction of the Czechoslovak Communist
regime to “Veto” gives vivid indication of the
operation's effectiveness. On May 5 the Czechoslovak government made an official protest to
the US government objecting to the action and
demanding that “the US government punish all
persons who have participated In the organization and execution of this campaign...” The
Czech protest sald in part:

“This foolish trick can only meet with contempt as lar as the Czechoslovak working people
are concerned. For those whose bosses are
notoriously Known throughout the world as
exploiters, as the worst enemies of the working
class and o/ all working people, and as ruthless
colonizers try to speck in these leallets about the
rights and social achievements of the working
people

The US government rejected the protest,
saying:

“It is understandable that the American people
would seek by such means qs are available to
maintain contact with the people of Czechoslovakia with whom they had formerly enjoyed
a free association and with whom they share
many common traditions and belieis. The
American people take a profound interest in the
wellare and future of the people of Czechoslovakia. The leaflets borne to Czechoslovakia
express the interest of the American public in
seeing the wellare of the people there improved
through the attainment of a series of goals.
Notwithstanding, the Czechoslovak government
claims that these leaflets were subversive and
inciling. It consequently appears that in the
eyes of the present regime in Czechoslovakia
discussion of concrele steps to better the lot of
the common man in that country is tantamount
to subversion...”

In the period of May through August there
were 155 separate denunciations and large-scale
attempts to counter the effects of the radioleaflet campaign. Regime reaction in this period
ranged from attempted radio propaganda diversions of protest to a flood of hysterical newsPaper editorials arguing the issues raised by
the radio broadcasts and leaflets, often in
terminology taken from the leaflets.

The May issue of Slovo Agitatora {The
Agitator’s Handbook"), a detailed instruction
booklet issued to all Communist functionaries
in the cities, towns, and villages, devoted its
major effort to a detailed “refutation” of a
current issue of “Free Europe” (Approximately

 

 

Areas of concentration of Veto leaflets In Creech
slovakia, Darkest areas oe, heaviest con
tration.

 

one million copies of this leaflet had been
dropped over Czechoslovakia in the preceding
weeks)

The Communist propagandists were forced to
take up specific developments in the radio and
leaflet messages. Replying to the Veto” agricultural campaign in mid-summer, the Czechoslovak Minister of Bulk Purchasing angrily
declared over Radio Praque on August 7

“It is the duty of every lormer to fulfill his
deliveries and to reject the hostile attempts of
the emigres who broadcast treason and scatter it
over our country in leaflets

On the same day Radio Prague declared:

”... People’s Opposition. This is the new
name for those who with the help of balloons,
are dispatching leaflets to our territory ..- What
is their advice? They want no harvest, ‘The
crops belong to those who cultivate them,” they
suddenly claim...”

Meanwhile evidence of the people's reaction
in letters and refugee reports was mounting
in the May-August period, showing that the
people understood the implications of the campaign and supported it, A letter from Czechoslovakia made a characteristic remark:

"The balloon action is excellent. Everybody reads the messages. In some workshops
and factories there is always someone who
posis them on the door... They are everywhere, and no amount of gathering them up

 

Police patrols assigned to collect leaflets have
not “helped” the Communists to suppress the
campaign, nor haye fighter planes and soldiers
assigned to shoot down balloons

Careful analysis shows deeper, more significant gains in the gradual realization of the Ten
Demands. Although no decree has been issued,
so-called “absenteeism” is on the increase and
the regime seems powerless to curb it. This is
4 considerable change in the situation since the
start of Operation Veto, when the problem of
forced overtime work was focused in the fourth
demand of the People's Opposition: "No Meddling with Free Time.” Similar indications are
evident in the agricultural field, especially with

regard to forced delivery quotas; and where
no improvement has been forthcoming (as in
housing) the regime has been careful to cover
the subjects with intensified propaganda.

The first phases of Operation Veto posed
a serious, unprecedented question in the field of
free world political warfare: Could the free
world join in any degree of partnership with
the gradually emerging elements of true opposition to Communist oppression in ahe satellites.
and could such a partnership help to build the
opposition’s strength in sensible, effective ways
towards limited but attainable objectives?

In the evidence which tends to answer that
question the following remarks of a young

 

weakening it, are extremely great_

Following established procedure, Operation “Focus” exploits
the combined resources of radio and printed matter. In the early
days of the operation, the Voice of Free Hungary operated on
a virtual round-the-clock schedule, hammering home the Manifesto of the National Opposition Movement and its 12 Demands.
First refugee reports indicate that within a matter of hours the
entire program was known in the remotest corner of Hungary.

The geographical position of Hungary, its relatively great
distance from launching sites in West Germany, poses special

Czech student who escaped from Czechoslovakia
during this period give a typical reaction from
inside the country — he tells how his family
heard about the Ten Demands of the People’s
Opposition and discussed them secretly:

That night we heard about the contents of
the Ten Demands we ail fell silent. We were
all very happy and could hardly speak. Finally
my father said, "With this sort of basis one
can build and fight against the Communist
government because the resolution is eternal
and objective. By transplanting the Ten Demands we could lorce the regime to change its
tule...'"

OPERATION “FOCUS”

Operation “Focus” js the second large-scale combined operation sponsored by the Crusade for Freedom. Launched on
October 1, 1954, Operation “Focus” is directed against the satellite Hungarian regime and, like its predecessors, seeks to aid the
enslaved nation in its step-by-step struggle for freedom.

The strategic plan behind Focus” resembles that of present
Czechoslovak operations, but seeks to capitalize on the greater
insecurity and “softness” of the Hungarian Communist Party
The “12 Demands of the National Opposition Movement” (the
initials in Hungarian are NEM, or “NO!") call for restoration
of local autonomy and self-government, an end to persecution
of the peasant and the rebirth of private agriculture, free trade
unions, denationalization of retail and service trades, and a shift
from heavy to light industry, to name only a few. Close study
of the internal Hungarian scene reveals that opportunities to
win important concessions from the regime, at the same time

 

problems for any balloon action, To meet these difficulties
a special balloon was developed, which together with a special

release device for leaflets, permits depth penetration. The success Th
of these measures is reflected in the fact that on October 18, less Opposition Movement
than three weeks after the operation had bequn, well over one

‘12 Demands of the National
first leat
let designed tor Hungary.

 

 

million copies of the Manifesto and 12 Demands were dropped
into Hungary by balloons launched from a single site.

Three days earlier, on October 15, the Hungarian regime, notoriously slow to react to freeworld political warfare attacks, delivered an angry diplomatic note of protest to the United States

Legation in Budapest:

“Since the first days of October, balloon-transported leaflets are dropping on the territory of
Hungary. According to the unanimous report of American and other news agencies the balloons
are launched by the so-called Radio Free Europe, financed by the so-called Crusade for Freedom.
They are launched from the American-occupied zone oi Western Germany towards Hungary with the
task of automatically emptying their load of leaflets over the territory of the Hungarian People’s
Republic. The openly-advertized purpose of this action is thai the provocative and calumnious
leaflets arouse dissatisfaction and opposition against the legal government.”

Early refugee reports indicate that the signs.“NEM™ and “12” are appearing in Hungary —

scrawled on factory walls, railway cars, regime election posters, and

ment offices,

the doors of local govern
 

 
Le ON WINDS
' OF FREEDOM

 

 

Workers filling b.
leaflets for the computed

loons with prescribed weight of
rise through the moving air

 

mined

   

Delivery of printed materials to predet
target areas behind the [ron Curtain requires
scientific plotting of balloon flights on the pre
vailing winds blowing to the east. Technicians
and working crews at the Free Europe Press
launching sites remain on the a! to go into
Production when favorable winds are reported

 
 

 

from seven different wind observation sources

=
Sa Et.

 
  

 

ubber balloons, Exact amount of
by the balancing on arm on

Production tine
hydrogen ts meas

the filling device, an invention of Czech member of

Free Europe Press. Workers seal filled balloons with
leaflets inside

 

 

n fights to “targets
io Curtain.

  

Meteorologist plots bal
behind the Ir

      

With accurate Information on wind directions
and speeds meteorologists compute the ratio of
paper payload and hydrogen required to lilt the

balloon on the “Westerly Winds of Freedom
to high altitude over desired target points. At
th points the balloons release their paper
(see diagram for difierent methods) and thou
sands of leaflets stream to earth, still following
the course of the plotted winds. In a single
launching period of ten hours more than two
tons (4950 pounds) of paper, amounting to
1,188,000 leaflets, e been put into the air
from one launching site.

  

 

a

 

 

Production line for large plastic balloons, Paperboard

containers attached to balloons carry the computed

ight of paper. Below the container, a paper enve

pe holds dry ice ballast which permits timing of
the release of the leailets.

 

  

 

 

Three types of balloons serve different purposes. The rubber pn (left) containing leaflets is carried
by the wind as It rises to high allitude (30,000 to 40,000 feet). It expands al rises and, depending on its load
predetermined polat and showers its leailets to the earth. The smaller plastic pillow-shaped balloon
{center} also contains leaflets and expands as It rises, but instead of bursting it springs a leak. The leakage
of gas causes the balloon to settle slowly to the ground. It delivers Its load of leailets intact, inside the
waterproof container. The large plastic balloon (right) carries leaflets Inside the paperboard contain

suspended below. Under this is an envelope containing dry ics st. The release of paper occurs when
the dry ice ballast is exhausted. This upsets the balance ot oard container, which dumps the
leaflets. This ballast system enables the balloon to rise to a specified aitit and “float” there on fave
winds, The use of dry ice as ballast permits the timing of release according to the rate of sublimation.

 

   

  

bursts at

     

 

   

    
 
   

 

Three types of balloons in

fight

    

Sheat of leaflets drops from
release mechanism


Radio programs and delivery

of printed matter are co

ordinated and timed tor
maximum impact

  
 

Howe ®*

 
I_ INFORMATION REPORTS / from
15 RFE Bureaus (103 Persons )
flow into Munich at rate of
1.200 per month:

Refugee interviews - Reports
from Travellers, Athletes,
Letler-Writers, etc.

   
    
    
 

II. MONITORING of

35 Regime Radio Stations
on regular basis, spotcheck of
12 more, Soviet & Satellite
News Services

 

T.NEWS from Wire Services

a) INS, Reuters, and monitored
Soviet and Satellite news
services

b) News items and reaction
from RFE Bureaus

c) Daily roundup of news and
comment by teletype from N-Y.

d) Editorial comment
and lead articles from
American & W-European

_ Press

e) Translations, reprints,
clippings, etc.

 

  

IW. 550 NEWSPAPERS

and Magazines from a ee
behind the Iron Curtain, a

fescue. 15000 BOOKS
— from the Satellite
countries, plus 10,000
from the West, with
emphasis on economic
and politics.

      
 

¥
FREE EURO

Processed by Staff of 46 Evaluation
Experts, Translators, etc.who assess
reliability, Evaluation files contain
250,000 cards,with over 1250000
entries, thousands of clippings,
newspapers, maps, etc.

 

 
   

Staff of 52 monitors over
200,000 words per day in
10 to 12 languages.

Staff of 23 processes and distributes
250,000 words per day - 24 hours
a day - seven days a week.

lf aaa

Handled by staff
of 41 researchers
and librarians.

  
 

From this source material, plus
independent research and onthe-spot coverage of special
events RFE Munich’s 115 editorwriters, teamed with

producers

actors

announcers

composers

musicians

researchers

freelance contributors

create * 184 hours of original
programs weekly ,

RFE~- New York prepares an
additional * 25 hours per week
(15 %o of total programs) but
all are broadcast from Munich.
N-Y. Programs in form of scripts,
tape recordings, or daily shortwave transmissions direct to
Munich include American Press
comment, “The American Scene”,
Special Events & Topics, Exiles
in America, etc.

* Original Programs plus repeats
total 426% hours per week.

 
CHART

Voice of

Voice
P Voice
Voice

Voice

¥ IL. Political
Commentaries

 

of

of

of
of

Free
Free
Free
Free

Free

ye I. Straight Newscasts

  

I.”Group” Programs
Labor - Agricultural - Women’s
Youth - Calling the C P- Economic

    
   
   
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
 

Czechoslovakia
Poland
Hungary
Bulgaria

Rumania

 

16% of total broadcast hours ™'
623 minutes of news per day
430 newscasts per week

IV. Feature Programs
Cultural - Religious - Plays
Political Satire - Music &
Entertainment
a

WESTERN GERMANY

‘

BIBLIS
Transmitter Station

ih

“to? an
RADIO FREE EUROPE i/. A) crochosion
4 ~~ tun zary,

 
 
  
 

  

TECHNICAL FACILITIES IN EUROPE aRumanie,

"Cue"

akia, =

avulgarie

POLAND —
CHAM
MW = Transmitter

eH
oo hy”
SCHLEISSHEIM ie

Receiying ahd Monitoring Station | RUMANIA
a ae MOOS BURG “See
BULGARIA

x \ \ Monitoring Station
h x =
h si Monitors apnrox, : i “
C4 3
\* 7

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

HUNGARY

  

    
 
  

fe
TDR Program = — 9 satellite |
Ly | from New York % ; Broedcasting Stations |
| 4 7
A Fa say | _ ae ies
Energency Relay | ” 4 | ' oe ite ue
to Portue +s | rer ry
ORE | 4 Western News Azencies| | :
7 tiles |
2 $5 miles NSS
“200 Milles era
——— é MUNICH
Pec ivank a en Headquarters } e= __]
p TUGAL Radio Teletyne See { ech,Monitoring from
ORTU ortugal Teletype >> SS -(C]
and Telex |
“4 5 4 sshind the Iron Curtain
Mobile Priginating Point res
ee BOO for 21l Broadcasts fae)
; 20 Studios and
y Control Rooms L
fech, Monitoring | 13 miles
MW to CZ-SI
HOLZKIRCHEN
Transmitting Station
| l |
Transmitting /
Station
} — To Poland,
\ Czechoslovakia,
Approx, 1300 miles — i oe Hungery

~ as a
Receiving Station —

 

 

Reversible to Target Areas

POINEE RING DEFT. MUNI
25 TAM OES Say
