 

159013

¥

AN ESTIMATE OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF
RADIO LIBERATION

Wilbur Schramm

1 September, 1955

‘APPROVED FOR RELEASE?

Fe eS. a Late DATE: 16-Feb-2011
es RS

 

 

peter *

EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs CONFIDENTIAL

£2) ee

TN

 
C05459013

’
x

SECRET - oo

CONTENTS

Summary
Bases of this report

Previous evaluation of Radio Liberation

 

Is Radio Liberation delivering a signal? :
What do the defectors and escapees say? |
What doaa the mail say?

What have been the regime reactions?

The import of this evidence

What can Radio Liberation hops to ecconmplish?

Conclusions

 
°
SUMMARY

The writer of this report has consulted with the chief
officers of the American Committee for Liberation from Bolshevism ore
and of Radio Liberation, Munich; discussed Radio Liberation with
a representative of the American Embassy, Moscow; discussed it
with representatives of the Peripheral Reporting Service of the
U.S. Department of State, with interviewing officers at Frankfart
and elsewhere, and with one recent high-level refugee from the
Soviet Union. He has read the 1954 OCB evaluation and all
pertinent Radio Liberation documents since that time; examined
all available defector reports bearing on Radio Liberation;
examined all records of regime reaction as to Radio Liberation;
exanined a sampling of emigre press reaction to Radio Liberation;
looked at all reports on Radio Liberation’s mail and seen sone
of the mail; read the Committee's studies, "Notes on the Policy,
Content and Porm of the Ideological and Psychological Struggle
Against Bolshevism,” (April 1953) and "{mproving the Effectiveness
of Radio Liberation," (October 1953); read a transcript of the
Cambridge Seminar of Committee executives and scholars in the
Soviet field (May 1955); and read a week of Radio Liberation
scripts.

On the basis of this experience, he concludes:

X. The nature and amount of evidence available do not
permit us to say with any scientific confidence that Radio
Liberation is or is not being effective in the Soviet Union.

2. However, the majority of trends in the evidence are
favorable. The number of defectors who have heard Radio Liberation
has increased markedly over last year, and a very large proportion.
of all refugees from the Soviet Union seem to be aware of, and in
most cases to have heard, Radio Liberation. Furthermore, the
Soviet press and radio broke their 20 months of silence regarding
Radio Liberation in December, 1954, and since that time there
have been three full dress attacks on the station and its
backers, indicating that the Soviet government feels knowledge
of the station is now widespread enough that silence is no longer
warranted.

3. Monitoring reports, however, have taken a sharp drop
in the last six months, indicating that several new and powerful
skywave jammers have caught up with the already viciously jammed
Radio Liberation. Radio Liberation is operating with comparatively
iow power and with its transmitters much too close to the Soviet
border to take advantage of favorable wave propagation angles by
which to bounce its short wave signal to its chief targets.

> aa

 

 
CU5459013

apetier .

4, The writer feels that Radio Liberation is reaching a
suall but important group of the Soviet vlast, notably members
of the hierarchy and of the military forces, particularly those
stationed outside the Soviet Union. The writer is impressed with
the enormous difficulty Radio Liberation has undertaken in trying
to be effective with this audience. There are no ready-made
conditions for acceptance, as in the case of Radio Free Europe's
audience. Rather, these listeners approach Radio Liberation
with suspicion, listen to it through jamming so vicious that
Radio Liberation'’s programs are arbitrarily limited to four minutes each, and think of its messages not as their spokesman
attacking an imposed government, but rather as an outside voice
attacking their government -- indeed, a government in which many
of the listeners have a personal stake. "Liberation" may therefore be an unfortunate word for what Radio Liberation can realistically hope to accomplish. Rather, it can hope to plant some
doubts in the minds of members of the Sovict vlast who are
accustomed to hear only one side of all political questions.
Xn a small way it can help to keep these isolated Soviet citizens
in touch with the West. [ts realistic mission is therefore
smaller than the grandiose name may indicate, but important as
long as the Iron Curtain stays down, for it is one of the fev
ways we now have of talking seriously with members of the Soviet
power structure.

5. Granted the importance of the mission, it is clear that
Radio Liberation'’s facilities for getting a signal into the
Soviet Union should be strengthened. Specifically it is recommended that the plan for establishing transmitters in Spain be
pushed vigorously; and that, failing this, another site be secured
On the Western edge of Europe.

6. Without a usable signal, the finest radio staff in the
world would be voiceless. Nevertheless it is recommended that
everything possible be done to strengthen the desk personnel of
Radio Liberation, and thet consideration be given to establishing
Moscow and Washington correspondents for the station.

~Qe
 
C05459013

subs a
X. Bases of this report |
During the last few months, the writer of this report has:

consulted with the chief officers of the American Committee
for Liberation from Bolshevism, and the chief
engineer of Radio Liberation, New York;

consulted with the chief officers of Radio Liberation,
Munich, including the radio adviser, the chief
engineer, most of the desk heads and desk advisers;

read the 1954 OCB report on Radio Liberation and all pertinent Committee on Liberation materiais since that
tims ;

examined all available defector reports bearing on Radio
Liberation;

examined all records of regime reaction to Radio Liberation;

examined a sampling of the emigre press reaction to Radio
Liberation;

looked at all reports on Radio Liberation mail, and
examined some of the mail;

read the Committee's studies, "Notes on the Policy,
Content and Form of the Ideological and Psychological
Struggle against Bolshevism," (April 1953) and
"Improving the effectiveness of Radio Liberation"
(October 1953);

read the transcript of the Cambridge Seminar of Committee
executives and scholars in the Soviet field (May 1955);
‘read a week of Radio Liberation scripts;

discussed Radio Liberation with a representative of the
American Embassy, Moscow;

discussed Radio Liberation with representatives of the
Peripheral Reporting Service of the Department of
State, and with interviewing officers et Frankfort
and elsewhere;

discussed Radio Liberation with one recent refugee from
the Soviet Union.

Qn the basis of this experience, the following report is

submitted.
ancker

=3C05459013

Liberation

II. Previous evaluation of Radio

     

It will be remembered that the OCB report of 1 August 1955
included an annex On Radio Liberation, discussing at some length
the history, organization, and objectives of the station, and
reviewing the evidence on its coverage and effectiveness, as such
evidence existed at that time. It will be further recalled that
the evidence at that time was extremely scanty, consisting principally of a limited series of monitoring reports and approximately
half a dozen refugee reports. The conclusion of the report was
that the evidence was hopeful, but that it was too early to make
a reasoned estimate of the effectiveness of the station.

Because of the existence of this earlier report, it is not
felt necessary to go into details of history, organization, or
objectives of Radio Liberation at the present time. Rather, the
following report can begin where the earlier report ended: by
reviewing the evidence which has accumulated since approximately
mid-June of 1954.

ok.
C09459013

IIIT. Is Radio Liberation delivering s signal?

Even 6 casual visitor to Radio Liberation, Munich, can age
hardly help but observe that the station has relatively meagre
physical facilities for the task assigned it.

In June, 1955 Radio Liberation had 86 kilowatts total power
for its entire European program, which is intended to cover most
of the Soviet Union in nine languages. Its transmitters are
clustered near Lampertheim, Germany. By contrast, at the sane
time Radio Free Eurcpe vas broadcasting on more than 800 kv.,
from a bank of transmitters near Munich and another large bank
in Portugal, and attempting to cover only a fourth as much
territory as Radio Liberation. VOA was broadcasting on vell
over 1000 kw., from Munich, Englanc, Tangier, the Courier near
Cyprus, and other favorable locations. Thus, Radio Free Burope
is equipped to "saturate" a target vith many simultaneous transmissions on different frequencies, and is favorably situated to
bounce a short wave signal into its desired target. VOA is
equipped to overpower opposition with its megawatt, and favorably
situated to bounce signals into many targets. But Radio Liberation
is weak in power, unequipped to saturate a target, and unable to
drav back to the edge of Burope and take advantage of the most
favorable bounces to be expected from short wave propagation.

Furthermore, Observers agree that Radio Liberation is jammed
viciously -- more viciously, perhaps, than any other foreign
station transmitting across the Iron Curtain. The best estimate
it was possible to make in June of 1955 suggested that the
kilowatts of jamming power used against Radio Liberation were at
Jeast ten times the power of Radio Liberation itself.

Under these circumstances, then , it is not surprising
that reception reports would be less than cptimun.

Radio Liberation is monitored in Berlin, Vienna, Helsinki,
and Turkey. It is reported that during the summer months, an
"intelligible" signal is delivered there about 80 per cent of the
time, and adout 60 per cent of the time in the winter. However,
during the spring months of 1955, several new Russian skyvwave
Jeammers caught up with Radio Liberation, and there was a sharp
decrease in the percentage of intelligible signals,

These reports, of course, are all for peripheral monitoring,
and reflect skywave rather than ground wave jamming. The reports
from inside the Soviet Union are less encouraging.

An official of the American Embassy, Moscow, reports that
between the middle of Pebruary and the middle of May, 1955, monitors
at the Embassy and elsewhere in the Soviet Union (while travelling)

spain

we

 
C05459013

agotir

have attempted to receive more than 200 separate Radio Liberation
broadcasts, without positively identifying a single broadcast.

There are two other reports from inside the Soviet Union.
At Kiev, on 17 November, 1954, at 1945 OMI, Radio Liberation was
heard on 7.2 megacycles. About 80 per cent of the content vas
intelligible. And at Minsk, on: 20 November, 1954, Radio Liberation was heard briefly on 9.7 megacycles. A station break
was identified, despite interference, but the following Byelorussian nevs was jammed out in the first iten.

The general picture, then, so far as signal goes, is of
a station which is weak in power, poorly situated to beam short
wave to its chief target, severely jammed, and with jamming
increesing in severity. Some signals are undoubtedly getting
through, but it must not be easy to hear Radio Liberation in
many parts of Russia.

 
C05459013

 

 

- SRORET

IV. What do the defectors and escapees say?

There are now approximately 20 refugee reports, direct
and indirect, on Radio Liberation. These are few compared
to the huge numbers available on RIAS and Radio Free Europe,
but encouraging when compared to the bare half dozen available
One year ago.

Because they are so few » they can be enumerated individually:

Soviet defectors

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
C05459013
 

 

 

; ———_

 

 

 

 

 

Non-Soviet and indirect testimony

an! | who escaped from the Soviet Union
in said that "Radio Liberation is widely listened
to in Lithuania, although it is the most heavily jammed of all
Western stations."

 

 

 

- An escapee from East Germany, of questionable reliability,
claimed to have listened to Radio Liberation in 1953 with a
Russian officer who “had confidence in the broadcasts because
of their cbjectivity and eccuracy,"

 

Al | from Hungary, reported in February, 1954,
that he listened regularly in Hungary, despite heavy jamming,
and considered Radio Liberation programs "the most effective
of all Russian-language broadcasts."

 

 

AD  lencapee, said in Nay, 1954, that the young
generation in Csechoslovakia, compelled to study Russian, is
making use of its knowledge of that language to listen to Russian
broadcasts, “particularly those of Radio Liberation." He declared
that Redio Liberation is "extremely populer for its sharp
anti-Soviet prograns."

A man who left Western Ukraine in the latter part of 1953,
said (in August, 1954) that he had dat rts on Radio Liberation
end cther weatern broadcasts in the, dabor camp.

pee

-BLUD459013

 

A sd may Leningrad said that he listened
to Radio Liberation in November, 1953, and September, 1954.

The following information came to an employee of Radio
Liberation in October, 1954, from commercial travelers near
the Iranian border of USSR: "Travelers across the border
from the Soviet Union bring evidence that many people are
listening to our radio in Georgia, including important
Communists."

A Danish student delegation traveling in the USSR
were told by three Russian students at the University of
Kharkov thet these students "knew of Redio Liberation."
At this point the conversation was stopped by one of the
officials present. (CM 9939).

A report from the American Embassy, Vienna, dated
January 20, 1955, says that a Soviet official remarked in
conversation on 7 January, 1955, thet "I was repeating
exactly the arguments of the ‘VOA' and of ‘that other radio,
so-called liberation. ’" .

These reports aust be toterpreted with great caution
and reserve. On the one hand, they represent a pitifully
eameall handful of evidence; on the other, they represent a large
proportion of all the defectors from the Soviet Union. Most of
them come from members of the Soviet services stationed outside
the Soviet Union, or from other reporters on the edges of the
Soviet territory; but this is not necessarily to be equated
with a deacription of Radio Liberation's Soviet audience,
because only the individuals stationed outside the Soviet Union
or on its borders have much chance to defect or see much of
other civilizations. The tone of the reports is quite favorable
te Radio Liberation; but on the other hand, it must be remembered
that defectors, as a class, feel the need to justify their
dafection in their own minds, to please their new friends, and
to get a job -- perhaps with Radio Liberation. |

The most that should be said of this evidence, then, is
thet it is hopeful. Radio Liberation is being heard in a
number of different places, and by groups, such ag the arsy,
which it should be very glad to reach. It is apparently being
used as a rallying point for anti-Soviet sentiment. Whereas on
this evidence one can neither prove a huge audience nor a tremendous
impact for Radio Lib«ration, still one cannot reject those either.
In the ebsence of more conclusive facts, the evidence is good.

oQe
LCUDYIDYIVULS

oN
. sad t
| :

¥. What does the mail sey?

In Septenber, 1954, Radio Liberation established ail
drops in certain West Buropean cities. A dribble of letters
has come in. A tabulation of the letters received in Berlin
and Copenhagen, between September of 1954 and spring of 1955,
will illustrate their nature 3

(date on postmark undaciphersbie) from Ukrainian collective
farmers and workers.

Septeuber 28, 1954, in Russian from Poland, requesting
gall-bladder medicine.

Octoder 3, 1954, in Russian from West Germany.

Cctober 7, 1954, in German from West Germany.

October 4&4, 1954, in Russian from “old emigre” in France.
Geptemer 24, 1954, in Russian from West Germany.

October 9, 1954, in Russian from West Germany, suggesting
improvements.

October 15, 1954, in Russian from Austria.
October 15, 1954, in French from France ~ abusive.

October 9, 1954, in Russian from Kharkov, friendly, written
es though to "deer Auntie Maria."

October 24, 195%, in Russian from Netherlands.
. September 9, 1954, in Russian from West Germany.
October 10, 1954, in Russian from Tambov -~ angry.

November 14, 1954, in Russian from Mogilev -- indignant “in
name Of all the pupils in ay class."

October 6, 1954, in Russian from Belgius.

jootober 10 and November 14, 1954, two letters in Russian,
from "young Soviet patriots." These may not be genuine.

January, 1955, in Russian from Paris.

POnSeee @ Ce

-]0
 
C05459013

As with the defector reports, this mail must be
interpreted with great caution and reserve. Ooviously, only
6 of the 18 letters are from within Russia; but it mst be
remembered that it is not easy to write letters from within
the Soviet Union to the West. Only one of the letters from
within the Soviet Union is friendly, and it is written under
a “dear Auntie Maria” cover; but on the other hand, the fact
that schools are permitted or inspired to write protesting
letters against Radio Liberation would seem to indicate that
the station is known. None of the letters is very helpful in
regard to specifics, but some of them may well be conveying
information under a cover: @.g., "of course some people here
believe your broadcasts , but we know them for the lies they
are"..scccccee My wife and I listen to your broadcasts every
night” (followed by protests against the broadcasts). On the
whole, the mail results are simply another bit of evidence
that the station has scme audience and is capable of arousing
some strong feelings, pro or con. It is not merely throwing
an anonymous signal into an unpopulated night.

aan oe

 
C05459013

saan _

Vi. What have baen the regime reactions?

Up until December, 1954, when Radio Liberation had been
on the air 18 months, the official Soviet presse and radio
maintained a complete and heavy silence in regard to Radio
Liberation. In the early summer of 1954, Radio Liberation
taunted the Soviet spokesmen to answer its arguments and
recognize ite presence; it 13 not altogether surprising that
the Russiens did not fall for that one. But since Dacember
of 1954 there have been three strong reactions from the Soviet
regims.

The first of these was a letter by a redefector which
attacked the Coumittee, the Institute for the Study of the
U.S.8.R. cud the Radio -- naming Radio Liberation twice and
mentioning its Georgian desk. This was published in Zarye
Vostoka, an Armenian paper, and broadcast on the Armenian
regional radio. Pravda reprinted the ietter, but -- significantly -Omitted the name of the radio station. At that time it vas
apparently stil} not policy to mention Radio Liberation.

Later in the month, Alexei Surkov, First Secretary of
the Union of Soviet Writers, spoke out angrily at the second
Sovist Writers Congress. His vords were apparently motivated
by the series of broadcasts which Radio Liberation had been
directing to Soviet writers and about Soviet literature in
general and the freedom of Soviet writers in particular.
Among other things he said: "The enemics of our country and
our literature sre not silent. Mm the cccasion cf our Congress,
the White emigre Boris Zaitsev was drogged out of the literary
trash basket to babbje poisonous words of impotent. malice over
@ White Guard microphone.” The reference is clearly to Radio
Liberation, which vas the only station to beam ths voice of the
distinguished writer Zaitsev to Russio, and it ieft little doubt
either that Soviet writers knew very well vhat station he was
referring to, or that he was deeply stung by what, Radio Iiberation
had been saying.

Qn April 17, 1955, XIzvestia published @ iong aecount of a
press conference organised by the "Committee for Return to the
Homeland." This was mostly e statement by Professor V. P. Vasylaki,
who had defected to West Germeny, and had been active in emigre
circles and had some connection with the activities of the
American Comittee. Most of the statement is devoted to showing
that "the American Committee is an organ of the United States
State Department and....implements the policies of American
imperialists," and to painting a grim picture of the situation
among Soviet emigres in West Germany. In the middle of this,
however, he spoke his mind on Redio Liberation:

wa
ol2=

 

 
 

CU5459013

wher

Radio Liberation, he said, "is an organ for spreading
dirty. falsification and black slanders fabricated by American
intelligence about the creative toil of the democratic peoples.
After all, how can someone like Nikolai Kovalsiy, head of the
Ukrainien Desk know the truth about the Soviet Union in general
or the Soviet Ukraine when he was on Ukrainian territory only
as a hireling of the armies of occupation and never saw Soviet
life; or Zenon Pelenskyj, who only saw the Ukraine during the
fascist rule as an active collaborator.”

That was his only reference to Western radio operations.

This, like other evidence on Radio Liberation, must be
interpreted with caution. The Communist countries have many
different reasons for mentioning Western broadcasts, and many
different vays of doing so. The more disciplined and
sophisticated the propaganda organizetion of the country, the
more likely Western radio is to be mentioned only when by so
doing the Communist country can take initiative in the propaganda battle -- for example, when the Western radio has made
an obvious error, or when the radio can be used to illustrate
some Communist charge against the Western countries.

For example, the first and third of the regime reactions
mentioned above vere obviously part of the redefection campaign.
Radio Liberation was used to bolster the themes that the life
of a defector is an unpleasant business, and that the only
emigres who remain are those who are selling out the motherland
to the American imperialists. But even so, these make a
pattern. For the first 25 months of Radio Liberation, Moscow
was silent on the subject. Then a regional paper and station
mention the station quite openly, but Pravda, the central paper,
omits the station’s name. Four months later, Izvestia, another
central paper, quite openly attacks the station. In other
words, it took about two years before Moscow felt that nothing
more could be gained by giving Radio Liberation the silent
treatment.

In many ways, the most interesting and significant of the
three attacks is the speech at the Writers Congress. The words
of the speech appear, so far as we can interpret them at a
distance, to reflect real heat, rather than synthetic propaganda.
Was the Party really stung and angered by what Radio Liberation
said about the lack of freedom Soviet writers enjoy, and by the
American and Russian writers whose massages were beamed to
Russia (John Dos Passos, James T. Farrell, Thornton Wilder,
Boris Zaitsev, etc.)? And why did the First Secretary choose to

a

 

 
C05459013

_ susp _
talk about Radio Liberation end Zaitsev at a meeting of One
of the most influential elice groups in Russia, the Writers

Coogress? The implication is clearly that the writers alreacy
knew something about what Radio Liberation was saying.

om] =
CUD4DYULS

VII. The import of this evidence |
lat us be clear about the evidence we have been examining.

This ia not the kind cr amount of avideuce which would
satisfy a research wan or acholur. [ft is not the kind which, in
quality or quantity, permits wa to aay conclusively that Radio
liberation is or “a not being effective in the Soviet Union.

On the other hand, this is as much evidence as we have any
right to expect from the USSR zo long as the [ron Curtain stays
down, and passage through it is a0 greatly restricted.

Therefore, we are reduced to examining trenda and
plotting projections. And at this devel, we can cay that two
of the three curves we eee in the foregoing evidence are favorabdie.

Que yesr ago, we had only six refugee reports of any kind.
Now we have in tha neighborkood of 20, some direct, some indirect.
k% is highly encouraging that most of the few refugees we get
frem the Soviet Union continue to knew about Radio Lizeration.

One year ago, we had only a dead silance on the subject
of Radio Liberation from the Soviet press and radio. A fair
asevmption is that, at that tims, the Soviet government felt
that any gain they might derive by attacking Radio Liberation
would be overbalanced by their loss in further edvertising the
station. Now we have three vigorous rogime reactions, between
December 1954 aud May 1955. Dwo of thesa vere in connection
with the redefection campeign, but the third wes before an
influential elite group, the Soviet Writers Congress, and was
@ direct reference to Radio Liberation’s programs on the Congrees.
It is never safe to vear a Soviet regime attack as a stripe on
the arm. There are too wany reasons why the Soviet strategists
may decide to attack, and not all of them, by any means, are
complimentary to the radio which is being attacked. But this
et least is clear: that the Soviets no Jenger think they have
enything to gain vy hiding the name of the atation, or by
avoiding reference to it in some of their elite groups. And this
is truly encouraging.

The trend in monitoring reports, however, is not encouraging.

The fact that American Enbassy monitors in Moscow have been
completely unable to recaive Radio Liberation between February
and May, 1965, is lege discouraging then the falling off of
intelligible reception as measured by peripheral monitoring.
Whereas the Embassy reports indicate probably that ground wave
Jamming is severe, especially in the vicinity of Moscow, the
peripheral reports zuggest that new and powerful skywave jammers
bave caught w with Radio Liberation and are blanketing it over
large aress. The curve has fallen off so sharply in the spring

“15 2

oe ee ee ee
C05459013

of 1955 es te cause real concern.

On the basis of the evidence before us we can make sone
good guesses as to Radic Liberation's audience in the Soviet
Union. It will be far from a mass audience: after all, perhaps
only ene out of 100 persons in the Soviet Union have sets with

short wave components, and many of those wiil find Radio Liberation

thoroughly jamued. it will be a heavily official audience: these
are the classes who own the short wave sets and have the opporetunity to avoid the Jamming -- as, for axemple, in official
listening or iistening while on assigument in the sateliites.
The audience must contain: .
representatives of the official hierarchy -- because
it is the duty of some of them to iisten, and
because we have reports like these of the Sevict
official in Vienna, and reactions like those at
the Writers Congress.

representatives of the military officer cless,
especially on duty outside the USSR -- as we can
tell from the number of defectors from the Soviet
forces in Germany and elsewhere who have heard
Radio Iiberation.

& suattering of the general population, wany of whom
have probably heard it by chence wuile tuning
around the dial.

Af we can assume & small but potentially important audience
dike thia one, then it becomes important to ask: what can Radio
Liveration hope to sccompiish with euch an audience? This we must
take up uaxt.

ai

ol6-<

 

 
C05459013

opener ~

VIET. What can Rudio Liveration hope to accomplish?

The more one studies Radio Liberation’s potential accemplishpent, the more one is impressed by the enormous dizficuty of the
tank it has attempted.

Contrast for a moment the differences in the situaticas
in which Radio Liberation and Radio Free Surope find themrelves.

Radio Free Burope hag a potential masa audience in Czechosiovakia, very lavge potentinl audiences in Poland and Bungery.
Furthermore, the crientation of these ceuntries hag been such
that a masse audience and widespread public opinion are capable
Of being politically influential. In the Soviet Union, on the
other hand, the audieace is potentially small, and there is
little to be accomplished by talking to members of the “faceless
unse,” because they are politically impotent.

Radio Liberation is therefore limited, both by seta and by
political realism, to talking to msabers of the "vlast" -- the
power structure. Whereas Radio ree Europn can broadcast to
people who overwhalminogly haute their commnist government, who
feel that it is a government imposed on them by an outside power,
who wholeheartedly want to "throw the rascala out" and get back
to some of the sla patterns of live, Radio Liberation, on the
other band, ion broadcasting to people wane fael ne sanch dAtvyiaiion
between themselves and their goverument. The Soviet governmexit,
for all wa may think of it, i6 not a government iuposad from the
Outside on Russians. The audience of Radio Liberation think of ct
as their government. Many of the Radio Liberation audience must
be members of the government or the upper party hierarchy; many
nore of them feel a personal stake in the success ef the government
end the party, They may grouse; they way not be setiafied. with
everything the government dors; but in general they believe
sincerely that they pave the best of governments. Radio Free
Europe is dealing with a built-in sotivation to listen, and
directing its shafts against an essentially unstable governnent.
Redio Liberetion is dealing with an extremely iatent notivation
to licten, and with an essentialiy stable government.

Radio Free Europe ig in position to know a great deal about
its audiences ind about the politica of its target countries.
where is a lerge flow of refugees and other intelligence. Radio
Liberation, on the other hand, is barred from iatelligence by
every device withip the power of the Soviet: government to use.
Refugees are Yew and far between, vritten materials seldom pass
except officinl print, the radio that comes out of Bussia is fornal
end official radie. Tous Radio Liberation, which has a more
extensive and complex structure to cover, end neade inteliigense
nore, has scceas to much lese intelligence then has Radio Free
BVPOPS o
C05459013

 

Then there is the preblem of attribution. The enigres
who spesk over Radic Free Burope Yiload it much easter te
canvinga She oromie back kame: thas they bave teh Gua or
patie letle and sb aibeaiaill -OVing motives, tu carry en the figkt

yom ebroad. 7% they Agve a connection with the sponsoring
&mericen Gommtise, that is all co the good, because énerica
{gs still regeriied ae the best hops of liberation. Dut she
Redio Liverstion people Seer a0 such sasy time explaining wie
they ere and by whay ctaki they speak to their komedand,
Stey have fled ac faretgn-lapoasd sovernaent. fhey have
taken up with agencies of & fereien country. Erigree arr
mot ino euehk goat olor in the Soviet Union aa in the cateliites,
and the Longer bey ara cut of Busele, the less likely shey
tre %© be cementeread aad admived. And what exactly -4 their
aletion t2 the U.3. government? Toe Soviee Dluntly calis
them spies anti agents of Amrican Lluteliigeuce. Thus, the
picture of "“emigres speaking across the Iron Curtain as a free
voice of the ailenced peoples" ia altogether a lees convincing
and attractive phetaurps ta tae Soviet Vaton than in the satediiter.

Tete is ack te japiy Ghat Regio Liberation caance aacmaplies
oO qguctawhaile vesmik, Xt is werely “co point ont the diffieuities
Lae way, fund when %O Ghege jiothitteal and social cirficulties
ous adda the whyelead difficulties -- an enormous territery to
aover with inadeguste power, wlth onavfriclent. and poorly Ieocated
tranimiiters, and with prograns which, teeewsse a? tha Jaume,
mm weaver wove tho “Sour naubes ae length - eo fin it de ese6y
to gee thst Ieatio Ubevation is trying to reach an& influence
People under Conditions of euormouy dicPieculty.

Some OF “ne disappoints: sates and aleiaterpretatione of
Peli Liberabiog fave vadeubtedhy arssen from Patiwire ta consider
sotcy vonditione JWOt enmuowecated, For exanpie, at the Zerlin
meeting 6-10 July. 1955, & representative of the U.S. Embassy,
MowecOw, exprezead series doubts over the miasion oP Rudo
fAberation. #22 cuggeated Unat if “ta om le were Leg Ly
Ate rition, saak wia ta mae wieu OF the situation in Sesela
(oa OF what lt 62.8 tA OnE SD acd that porhey o ite objectives
and papose should se reviewed “at higher levela." I do not
bave the procendings of tie conference at band, but believe
X have expreseud the wgirit of thie. representative's friendly
and concerned mamaring .

T ghoulé dike te suggest thet se Moscow representative wae
uisinterpretiog Retic Biberation ve aweh eg eae of the fAmextean
publicity hes mioivturpreted 14, he plain truth ie, thet
ROM Tiberstion ic ant @ precise perealiel to Hadie Free Surope

ol6=C05459013

 

snd cannot be within the foreseeable future. Radio Free Europe
is in the business of meinteloing the memory of freedom and

the casentially revolutionary attitudes which will someday, it
is hoped, help in the freeing of the satellite peoples and their
return to the comunity of free nations. In a seuse, Redio Pree
Rureps might sore properly then Radio Liberation be called "Radio
Liberation." For Radio Liberation, as we have said, is not talking to a peosle who hate a government imposed from the cutelde,
put rather to pembers of the Soviet viast who are part of the
power structure, who tend to respect their government as much

as we reepect ours, and fee] themselves ea part of it rather than
vietima of it. The objective of Radio Liberation as it clearly
omerges from the circumstances we have cited, and as 1% appears
team the reeent documents of the Committers, is wuch more nodent
$han that of Redio Free Kurope. It is essentially to plant the
seeds of doubt in the minds of Russians who have previously
never heard wore than one sife ef political questions, to make

@ beginning toward restoring the art of political thought to a2
eaulsure where people have been invited to agree rather then to
ayaluate, and, in a very small way, to keep the isolated and
vwaided-1a Seviet peoples in couch with the world outside the
Curtain .

This is « west purpose, and one to which emigres might
be expected to make their greatest contribution. Xt ie one
waiela the Mosecw Embassy representative would undoubtedly accept.
And although it may be less than the highest goals of some of
the emigres on Radio Liberation desks, I think 1t fairly repregente the goal of Regio Liberation as seen by its chief American

 Oxr¥iecers and by the chie? officers of the American Committes.,

If this is @ realistic goal, then we cen f111 in some of
“ie Size dimensions which we only suggested when talking about
Radio Liberation’s probable audience and likely impact.

Radio Liberation fe a swall voice =~ not a loud and
“aggressive voice like Radio Free Europe in the satellites, but
8 small, fairly quiet voive amidst all the thunder of Soviet
janning and Soviet broadcasts. It is not talking to a readynade audience, or dealing with a revolutionary situation.
Rather, 1% ia trying to laterest those listeners who can get
around the jamwing and whe turn to Radio Liberation weve lengths
efther out of curiosity or because of Offictal assignment.

These are not listeners who will hang on Radio Liberation’s every
word, and struggle with the jamaing to hear it. Rather, they
Wid come *O Lt with suspicion and hostility. And to these
fasteners, sadio Liberation is trying te apeak ae a triend wiaw
Lnows Rusaie, iu a way that wild vot further antagonize Nussian
iintepern, -ud with news and commentary that may plent a Lew

sEpit

olQe
C05459013

¢
‘§
“

axon

seeds of doubt and cause some second thoughts avout what the
listeners have already heard from Soviet sources.


The ultimate goal is to make some change in the form
and goals of Soviet power. But this is a very long-range
goal, and in trying to accomplish it, Radio Liberation is
only one force among many. Indeed, as compared to Free World.
diplomacy, it is a very small force.

The point we are trying to make is that the very name of
"Liberation" and the connotations of the name tend to lead
Radio Liberation to the wrong court of judgment. It should be
Judged by a much lesser test. Much less should be expected
of it. It is merely one of the ways we have of finding and
using the very tiny holes in the Curtain. If the Curtain
should open, if something like normal exchange of printed
materials and persons should become possible between the Soviet
Union and the West -- then we should doubtless want to reconsider
the function and even perhaps the need of Radio Liberation.

But in the meantime it must be valued for what it ia -- one of
the few ways we have to talk seriously with a few Russians in
the power structure -- and more "impact" than this must not

be expected of it.

-20
 

 

 

 
C05459013

‘f

»>

- sxx - _

1X. Conclusions

1. As we have said before, the nature and amount of
evidence available sare not sufficient to let us say with any
scientific confidence that Radio Liberation is or is not being
effective in the Soviet Union.

2. However, we can say with confidence that two of the
three trends in the evidence are favorable. Notably the
number of defectors who have heard Radio Liberation has
increased more than 200 per cent over last year, and a very
large proportion of all the refugees from the Soviet Union
appear to know about, and in many cases to have heard, Radio
Liberation. Furthermore, whereas the Soviet newspapers and
radio maintained a etony silence on Radio Liberation for the
first 20 months of its existence, since Decenber 1954 there
have been three attacks in the official press and radio,
indicating probably that the Soviet government feels that
knowledge of the station is now widespread enough that
silence is no longer warranted.

3. Yu the case of the third trend -- monitoring reports -there has been a discouraging development and a sharp decline
during the last six.moiths. There is no doubt that several
new and powerful skywave jammers have caught up with the
already viciously jammed Redio Liberation.

kh, It is the judgment of this writer that Radio Liberation is reaching a small but important group of the Joviet
Viast, notably members of the hierarchy and of the military
forces, especially those stationed outside the Soviet borders.
With these listeners it is undertaking a task of enormous
difficulty. There are no ready-made corditions for acceptance,
as with Radio Free Zurope. Rather, these listeners approach
Radio Liberation with suspicion, listen to it through jamming,
and think of it not as their voice attacking an imposed
government, but as an cutside voice attacking their government.
"Liberation" may therefore be an unfortunate name for vhat
Radio Liberation can realistically hope to accomplish.
Rather, it can hope to plant some doubts in the minds of
members of the Soviet viast who are accustomed to hear only
One side of all political questions, and in a small way it can
help to keep these isolated Soviet citizens in touch with the
West. Its realistic mission is therefore smaller than the name
may indicate, but important, for it is one of the ways we have
of talking seriously with members of the Soviet power structure
as long as the Iron Curtain stays down.

gee

oD].
C05459013

;

8
a “Ss ‘ .

a ry we _.. d 3 ewe
os SEoKeT

5. Granted the importance of the mission, it is clear
that Radio Liberation’s facilities for getting a signal into
the Soviet Union should be strengthened. This does not mean
that the human, as distinguished from the physical resources
should not also be strengthened; but the finest radio staff
ig no good if its signal isn’t reaching its target. Specifically
it is suggested:

a. That the plan for establishing transmitting facilities in Spain be pushed vigorously; failing this, thet another
site be secured on the western periphery of Europe.

db. That everything possible be done to strengthen
the desk personnel of Radio Liberation.

ec. That consideration be given to establishing Moscow
and Washington correspondents for Radio Liberation. This should
considerably increase the flow of pertinent program material,
and criticism of programs, available to the station.

o22a
