DECLASSIFIED
Authority

 

jer
SECRET PA(- 840.2

Vda

 

That any settlenent with the Soviets of issues in Europe sufficient
in scope to approximate a modus vivendi would include at least!
a. Arrangements for the reunification of Germany;

b. An Austrian treaty;

c. Security arrangenents probably including limitation of armaments.
It, . Peobleng:
A. Collective Security Fact:

» .. & eollective security pact or a non-aggression pact of the kind
hitherto concluded by the Seviest Union would only arouse grave anxiety
or cynical reserve among many people in the Free World andamong the
anti-Conmmmnist majorities in the captive countries. A security pact of
this nature would recall the unfortunate history of the USSR's open
violation of a whole series of non-aggression treaties entered into by
the Sovicts during the inter-war period. For exmuple, in the occupation
and forced incorporation of the Baltic Republics, the Soviet Union
openly violated at least sixteen bilatera; and mitilateral treaties of
peace, non-aggression and mitual assistance, If, in the light of the
historical record, a security pact now with the Soviet Union is to
inspire confidence and continued faith in the resolution and realisn

of the Western States it mst have teeth in it to curb the Soviet
striking power such as disarmament provisions implemented by adequate
control and inspection measures and to curb the hostile promganda of
the Soviet Union.

B. Status of the Orbit Peoples:

4a Apert from specific territorial issues, a major problem would be
how to negotiate on basic differences in Europe without damage to our
traditional position on the freedom of the captive peoples. The fact
plone of negotiations on comprehensive issues could be expected to arouse
concern among the captive populations, their exiled leaders ani Americans
_. of Eastern European descent that we might be preparing to sacrifice the
interests of the peoples in the satellite areas, It my be anticipated
that in such negotiations the Soviets would seek by every means, either
expressly or implicity, to obtain acceptance by the Nest of the validity

of the
SECRET |
DECLASSIFIED

Authority N NO 4266 /

 

SECRET
oe

of the satellite regimes, The danger to us would be enhanced if NATO
or WEU, were to negotiate, not with the Sovict Union, but with a military
and political organization of the Commmist States, somewhat as MendesFrance suggested in his recent speech. That kind of negotiation would
give the inpressicn, or would likely to be so construed, that we accept
the present Commnist regime in the orbit area as full, equal ani
legitimate menber States in the European commmity. The danger would be
lessened if we insisted on negotiations only with the Soviet Union ani
not with an Eastern European "NATO",

The problem of the status of the orbit peoples could conceivably
erise in terms difficult for us to handle so as to avoid the risk either
of open differences with our Allies in Western Europe or of loss of faith
in us among the captive peoples ani their proponents, It does not seen
possible for general negotiations to achieve mich result unless the
Soviets are prepared to accept substantially our terms for German
reunification, that is, free elections and withdrawal of Soviet
occupied forces from Eastern Germany, particularly the latter. If

the recognition by rt Bi of the legitimacy of the satellite regimes,

the final Polish-German boundary and a "security" association of the
Eastern European States. In such circumstances the difficulty of
maintaining cur position based on principle in support of the freedom _
and independence of the enslaved populations in Eastern Europe would be
considerably increased.

‘ The negative effects upon the captive peoples of even entering
into general negotiations with the Soviets might be countered by our
positively seeking agreement on measures for the holding in these areas
of free elections under UN supervision. This solution is popular among
both the captive people themselves ani the exiles, ‘

C. Status of the Baltic Remblics!

-*\ $inee the United States has taken so strong a position on principle
{legal incorporation of the Baltic

memorandum entitled, "Problens
of Compatibility of Collective Security Negotiations with the USSR ani

D. Polish
DECLASSIFIED

Authority NWO 2286 /

 

D. Polish Bomjeries: .
_ Gar public commitments on this subject my be summerized es
follors: *
4% Yalta, in 1945, Roosevelt, Churchill ami Stalin agreed that
should be compensated

be
east of the Gier-lleisse line, including ths southern portion of East
Prussia, should be placed umier Polish administration peniing such

under provisional Polish
Hinisters meeting, in Moscow, in 1947,

: In the East, we consider the northern pert of East Prussia as 2

cllowing bouniary line;
Senethadnie te and the southern pert ef East Frussia; (3) the
ani (4) the bouniery on the East
DECLASSIFIED

Authority N Ni ) AES /

 

“hea

could not negotiate with a Polish Governnent representative of the

People. in those circumstances, negotiation of a definitive boundary

the Oder-leisse line would also, of course, encounter the mobilized
opposition of all Poles in the Free World and their supporters. Our
best position might well be that we are not prepared to discuss this
question until a free end iniependent Polish Government fully representa~
tive of the Polish people exists to speak for them on this important
subject. On the same grounds we might avoid any action or statement
which could be considered as committing us to recognize de jure the
other existing Polish boundaries mentioned above.

E.. Sub-Carmthian =uthenia:
As inifcated in the attached paper an Czechoalevekia, the United
States recognised in the Peace Treaties with Hangary ani Sunanta th
boundary and

Peace Treaties could be interpreted to mean that by indirection we have recognized de jure the transfer of Sub-Carpathian Ruthenia
to the Soviet Union, which was accomplished in fact through Soviet

should take no position inconsistent with the principle that final
determination of the eastern border of Czechoslovakia cannot be made

until a free and indepenient government can represent the Czechoslovak
people as a party to any territcrial settlement involving areas belonging
to the Czechoslovakia of 1937.

IT. Gonclusion:

From the foregoing considerations it appears that the fundenental
question is whether at a time following the ratification of the London-Paris
realistic basis

egreenents exists for negotiating a general settlement
eee She Savas Mate ehile preserving the essential principles of our

public commitments. Jf a specific issue such as the Austrian
Treaty could be negotiated successfully a problem would develop of public

presentation
SECRET
aw

DECLASSIFIED

Authority NNO ANCE T

 

/

-5@
presentation.

The character of the limited settlement should be emphasized
so that the importance of the treaty is not distorted as signifying the
resolution of basic differences with the Soviets or the acceptance by the
West of the status quo in the Soviet orbit.

Attachment:

Mencrandun entitled, "Problems of

Compatibility of Collective Securi
tions with the USSR and

US Policy Towards the Baltic States".
