 

DR<— 10 ta

4 RESTRICTED

Intelligence Report

No. 5678

THE KATYN MASS GRAVES

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

 

Office of Intelligence Research
Dates October 30, 1951

 

 

 

 

 

ly

 

watt
an

it
mi

 

a
:
il

|
vostttttl
=,
”

Wilt

ii

 

 

i
I
i
=

Wassesf

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RESTRICTED

~~ DECLASSIFIED
; Authority 3 O2 oT’ G

 
RESTRICTED

This report was prepared from information
available through October 25, 1951 by the Division
of Research for USSR and Eastern Europe.

This report is distributed by OIR/IDR, telephone
ext. 4ih8 or h1h9. When it has outlived its usefulness
please return it to OIR/IDR, Room 101 SA-1.

RESTRICTED

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O2 5 Gs

 
 

RESTRICTED

TaBLE OF CONTENTS

Sistract «24 68 6 2 ee Ce ST eS Cee eA ee a

Ie Political Circumstances of the Katyn Graves Episode .....

IIe Pr°ncipal Investigations of the Evidence Regarding Katyn . .
*

IIIe Reconstructed Chronology of Events Relating to Katyn .« « « «

Ae
Be
Ce
De
Ee
Fe
Ge
He
le
Je

Railway Journey and Last Evidence of the Officers Alive

Soviet arrest of Polish Military Personnel, 1939-40. .
Segregation of Polish Officers in Special Camps, 1939 .
Liquidation of the Special Camps, April-May 1940 ...

Survivors of the Special Camps, 1940-41 « «2. « + @ «© «
Polish Search for the Missing Officers, 194143 «...
Revelation of the Katyn Graves by the Germans, April 194
Polish and Soviet Reactions to the German lievelations .
The Soviet Investigation of the Katyn Graves, 1945-44 .
The Katyn Question before the International ]filitary
Tribunal, TOQG. « « 2 0 a 8 8 8S ew AR we Te we 8

cog Ween ee ae

IV. The German Account of the Katyn Graves 2«.«se+eeeceveee

Ve Polish Appraisal of the German Account .« « «+ se-escsee

VI-e The Official Soviet Explanation of Katyn «© « «ee seecsecse

VII. Polish Questions Regarding the Soviet Explanation « « e « s+ «

RES TRICTED

 

 
RESTRICTED

ABSTRACT

Discovery of the Katyn mass graves was announced by the German
Government in April 1943, The graves contained the corpses of Polish
army officers who had been taken prisoner by the Soviet Army in 1939
and subsequently disappeared. This mch was admitted by the Soviet
Government, which, however, repudiated the German charge that they had
been executed by the NKVD. In January 19h) a Soviet investigating commission produced a lengthy report containing a detailed explanation of
the mass graves, which cast the blame for the executions on the Germans.

The Polish political emigration accepted neither the German nor
the Soviet account at face value, but pointed out discrepancies in
both, Most of the fundamental objections raised by the Poles have been
directed at the Soviet story, however. The majority of Poles appear
to be convinced of Soviet responsibility for the Katyn crime. With
this conviction, the Polish exile government since the end of the war
has continued its investigation of the data concerning the graves and
has emphasized the Katyn episode in its anti-Soviet propaganda.

RESTRICTED

 

 

    
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O2 5 6
RESTRICTED l

THE KATYN MASS GRAVES

 

Ie POLITICAL CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE KATYN GRAVES EPISODE

In April 1943 the German Government with much fanfare announced
to the world the discovery of mass graves in the forest of Katyn, near
Smolensk in German-occupied Russia, containing the remains of several
thousand human corpses dressed in uniforms of the Polish Army and
bearing the marks of brutal execution. Nazi propaganda at once launched
a campaign to exploit the grisly find as an example of Soviet barbarism
by alleging that the corpses were those of Polish officers captured by
the Red Army in September 1939 and subsequently murdered en masse by
the NKVD.e For more than two months the German press and radio published almost daily comuniques lengthily describing the progress in
exhuming and identifying the bodies. The German allegations were
widely reprinted and commented upon abroad.

The time of this episode was shortly after the battle of
Stalingrad, when the tide of the war was slowly beginning to turn
against Germany, though the German armies still occupied nearly a
maximum extent of Soviet territory. It was a time when a number of
political differences were beginning to come to the fore in the
Allied camp, particularly regarding the Polish question. In this
setting, the Nazi propaganda campaign regarding Katyn plainly had
as one of its aims an exacerbation of latent distrust and antipathy
between the Western Allies, including Poland, on one hed and the
USSR on the other. To this purpose it was well suited, as one of
the outstanding difficulties in the wartime relations of the Polish
Government in exile and the Soviet Government had been the failure
of the latter to satisfy Polish inquiries regarding the disappearance
of several thousand Polish army officers in the USSR, where they had
been taken as prisoners of war after the Soviet invasion of Polard
in September 1939.

Largely because of the already existing Polish-Soviet difficulties, the Katyn revelations of Goebbels! propaganda precipitated a
political crisis in the Allied campe The Polish Government asked the
International Red Cross to investigate the German chargese The Soviet
Government thereupon severed diplomatic relations with the Polish
Government, accusing the latter of having maliciously given credence
to the German propaganda for the purpose of discrediting the USSR.
Strenuous efforts of the British and US Governments to avert this
break, and to mend it after it hac occurred, were of no avail.

Though the Katyn question was probably only a convenient and
accidental pretext seized upon by the Soviet Government for a long

RESTRICTED

 

     
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O2 5 G

 
RESTRICTED 2

planned step (since growing Soviet—Polish friction over future frontiers
and related questions had for some time made such a break appear
possible), the episode marked a turning point in the development of

the Polish problem in World War IIe From this time forward the Soviet
Government openly began to groom a pro-—Communist Polish group in the
USSR to take over the rule of Poland after the war. This Soviet policy
in turn transformed the problem of Poland's future into a much more
complex and pressing issue between the USSR and the Western Allies,

with which the latter eventually were forced to deal at Yalta and
Potsdam.

Because of these larger issues that became prominent at the
time of the original sensation over Katyn, the question of the true
explanation of the Katyn graves became for the Poles a burning political question. If, as many or most of them thought, the Nazi
charges were true and were the explanation of the previous inability
of the Soviet Government to produce the missing Polish officers from
their prisoner-of-war camps, then they felt that so grisly a crime
should help justify them to the Western illies for their deep-seated
misgivings concerning the long-range intentions of the USSR toward
Poland, and should justify the Polish exile government, furthermore,
in resisting Allied pressure for concessions to the USSR on terri~
torial issues md related matters of prime importence. For these
reasons the Katyn episode remained a spectre in the background of
British and of US relations with the Polish Government in exile
during the remainder of the war, when the British and US Governments
were searching for means of reconciling the Polish exile political
leaders with the Kremlin.

After the war the installation of a Soviet-—controlled Communist
regime in Poland and the relegation of the Polish Government in exile
to non-recognized status by the major Powers intensified the antiSoviet feelings of the Polish political emigration and, among other
things, reinforced the inclination of the latter to keep alive the
menory of Katyn, which most Poles by then had come to regard as a
symbol of a Russian aim to destroy Poland. With the postwar break
down of the wartime alliance of the US, UK and USSR and the growth of
tension between the Soviet and non-Soviet worlds, the Katyn story in
its German-originated version was re—publicized by the remnants of the
former Polish Government in exile, partly for the purpose of drawing
attention to itself and partly to reinforce the whole schedule of
Polish grievances against the USSR.

II. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATIONS OF THE EVIDENCE REGARDING KaTYN

Because the Katyn mass graves and the human effects exhumed
from them were located in an area occupied by Hitler's armies and

 

 

 

 
RESTRIC | s

subsequently reoccupied by the Soviet armies, there was never an oppor—
tunity for an independent on-the-spot investigation of them by an
authority not involved in the charges and counter—charges concerning guilt °

Of the two on-the-spot investigations, the first, carried out
by the Germans in the spring of 1943, was in part witnessed by non
German delegations selected and brought to Katyn by the German authorities, including several groups of Poles from occupied Poland and a
panel of medico-—legal experts from European countries under German
domination as Well as from Switzerland and Finland. The panel of
experts signed a protocol purporting to give their opinions regarding
the evidence, which the German Government later published. Subsequently the Germans also published a lengthy report qtitled, "Official
Material on the Mass Murder of Katyn."

The second on-the-spot investigation of the graves was carried
out by the Soviet Government, following the recapture by the Soviet
armies in September 1943 of the region in which Katyn was situated.
No non-Soviet authorities were asked to participate in this investigation, although a number of foreign observers, including newspaper
correspondents, were taken to Katyn under Soviet auspices to witness
a part of the proceedings. In January 1944 the Soviet Government
published a report of its investigation, mtitled, "The Truth about
Katyn," which denied the anti-Soviet accusations of the prior
German report and cast the blame for the mass exccution back upon the —
Nazis. | ,

After the war a re-hearing of somes of the testimony relating .
to Katyn, at which German and Soviet witnesses confronted one another,
occurred during the trial of major German war criminals before the
International Military Tribunal at Nurnberg in July 1946. On that
occasion the Soviet Government atta@apted to have the responsibility
for the Katyn executions. formally fastened upon Germai.y. However,
although the hearing produced a small amount of new testimony, the
evidence remained inconclusive and the Soviet case was not pressede

An investigation of Katyn of a different type was carried out
by the Polish political authorities in exile. Their collection and
enalysis of evidence relating to the missing Polish army officers
commenced even prior to the Katyn revelations and have proceeded
continuously ever since. During 1941-42 General Anders, the commander
of the Polish army ‘then being formed on Soviet soil under the Soviet—
Polish agreemmt of July 30, 1941, directed an examination of all
available evidence of the whereabouts of nearly 15,000 Polish
prisoners of war, mainly officers, last heard of in the spring of
1940 at three Soviet prison camps. After the Katyn revelations the
Polish efforts to piece together the story of these prisoners were
redoubled, though under a handicap of distance, since by that time

RESTRICTED

 

 
RESTRICTED

wos

Anders and his army as well as the Polish diplomatic mission had been
forced to lecve the USSR. A major source of data was Anders! army
itself, some individuals of which had lived for a short time in the
same prison camps with the missing officers.

In 1946 the bulk of the evidence assembled in this fashion
was published in highly analytical form by the Polish exile authori~
ties in London for private circulation under the title, "Facts and
Documents Concerning Polish Prisoners of War Captured by the U.S.S.R-.
during the 1939 Campaigne" Various other books and articles incorporating some of the same material were published at that time
and subsequently by members of the Polish emigration. if While the

"Facts and Documents" and many of the other Polish publications on
the subject were presented with considerable regard for various
alternative explanations of the Katyn crime, most of them leave
little doubt that their compilers are convinced of Soviet guilt in
the matter.

III. RECONSTRUCTED CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS RELATING TO KATYN

From the data given in the German, Soviet and Polish reports
and in the records of the International Military Tribunal, a sequence
of the known or alleged occurrences relating to the missing Polish
officers some of whose bodies were found at Katyn can be pieced to~
gether as follows;

Ae Soviet Arrest Of Polish Military Personnel, 1939-40

Nearly all of the Poles whose bodies were subsequently iden~
tified in the Katyn graves were officers who had been among those
captured by the Red Army during its invasion of Poland in September
1989, or who were later arrested by the Soviet authorities in Sovict—
occupied Poland, or in the Baltic states, whither some had fled
after the September campaigne

The Katyn victims were only a small part of Polish prisoners
of war in the USSR, but they included nearly half the officers. There
is no precise information on the total number of Polish military
personnel interned by the USSR during and after the September campaign,
but Polish exile investigators have accepted a figure of approximately
«50,000, of whom somewhat more than 10,000 were officers,

 

1. The principal example is a volume entitled Katyn, by General
Wladyslaw Anders, published in 1949,

 

   
RESTRICTED S

B. Segregation Of Polish Officers In Special Camps, 1959

In October and November 1939 the Soviet authorities separated
most of the commissioned and cadet officers from other Polish prison~
ers of war and placed the majority of them in two large camps for
officers only, at Kozielsk, in the Province of Smolensk, and at
Starobielsk, in the Province of Voroshilovgrad. Another group,
consisting of Polish military and civil police, frontier guards and
members of the intelligence scrvices, both officers and ranks, were
simultaneously separated from other prisoners and concentrated in
a camp 2st Ostashkov, in the Province of Kalinine Of the remaining
thousands of non-commissioned officers and ranks, a large number
were ultimatelv released by the Soviet authorities end made their
way home to Polande |

Of the inmates of the three special camps at Kozielsk, Starobielsk and Ostashkov during the winter of 1959-40, nearly all subsequently vanished. Those in the two last-named camps have never
been found. On the other hand, the corpses subsequently revealed at
Katyn are believed by Polish exile investigators to have been those
of all but sa few of the officers who had been interned at Kozielske

The number of officers at the Kozielsk camp was at first around
5,000 but was gradually reduced to about 4,500 during the winter of
1939—40 through transfers of some inmates elsewhere. At Starobielsk
the number was about 4,000, and at Ostashkov about 6,500, including
ebout 400 officers and 6,100 ranks. The total for the three camps
was thus about 8,820 officers and 6,100 rankse Of these 14,920 or
more men, 448 are said by Polish investigators to have survived owing
to their transfer to other camps in the USSR. 1/ Between 350 and
400 of these survivors eventually found their way, after July 30, 1941,
into Anders' army in the USSR and became the primary source of the
information subsequently assembled by Anders regarding the: personnel
and conditions in the three camps prior to their liquidation.

C. Liquidation Of The Special Camps, April-May 1940

All accounts agree that the Kozielsk, Starobielsk and Ostashkov
camps were suddenly emptied by the Soviet authorities in the spring of
1940. Such details as are known concerning this liquidation derive
(1) from a few individuals whom the Soviet authorities separated from
the majority en route from the camps, who later mede ‘acir way to the
Polish armed forces in’ the West, and (2) from diarics purporting to
have been found on the bodies at Katyme

le Facts and Documents, pages 50, S6, 59, 67, 72-73, 95-7 and 108~—
109. |

RESTRICTED

 

 

 
RESTRICTED 6

From these sources the following account can be pieced togethers

The liquidation of the three camps by the Sovict authorities
commenced early in April 1940 and was completed before the middle
of Maye The prisoners were taken away in batches varying from 50 to
420 every two or three days, without being told of their destination.
The Kozielsk camp was emptied in this wey in &1 convoys between
April 3 and May lk; the Starobielsk camp between April 5 and May le;
and the Ostashkov camp between April 3 and the middle of Maye

The liquidation was conducted in much the sume minner in each
of the three camps: (1) the prisoners we ie told only that they were to
be moved "westward." (2) Every few days the Soviet camp authorities
read out a list of prisoners, selected according to no pattern discernible to the latter, in groups varying from about 50 to as many as
420 in number, who were directed to assemble for a departing convoy the
same day. (3) Those so assembled were segregated from the remaining
camp inmates, were searched and deprived of 211 Sovieteissued equipment
and sharp objects, had their personal belongings examined, and were
given food for a journey. (4) They were then marched out of camp
under heavy Soviet guard and taken in trucks or afoot to the nearest
railway, where they were put aboard prison cars which departed
immediatelye In this way each of the three camps was completely
enptied within a period of six weeks.

From that time the whercavouts of nearly all of the 15,000
prisoners were unknown outside of the USSR. After April 1940 letters
addressed to the prisoners at the three former camps were gener2lly
returned to the writers marked "Retour —~— Parti" (Return to Sender

le Facts and Documents, pages 54-74, 95-97, 106-109. Some weeks
later, in the summer of 1940, the Kozielsk camp was again filled
with other Polish prisoners, previously interned in Lithuania
and Latvia, The Starobielsk camp likewise was used again, first
as a transit camp for civilian prisoners (includins many from
Poland) and later for Polish prisoners of war. Many inmates
from both of these later groups eventually found their way into
the Polish army formed by General anders on Soviet soil in
1941-42, The fact that the cemps had been successively used by
different groups of Polish prisoners led at first to some cone
fusion in the tracing of evidence concerning the missing Polish
officers. (Facts and Documents, pages. 50-54, 974101.)

 

     
  

DECLASSIFIED

: Authority 3 OF oT 6

 
RESTRICTED 7

—— Addressee Departed)o 1/

D> Railway Journey And Last Evidence Of The Officers Alive

Though all trace of most of the 15,000 prisoners is lost from
the time they marched out of the camps, there exists some evidence
purporting to carry their story part way through the subsequent raile
way journey and, in a few cases, a short distance beyond the end of
that journeye This evidence is supplied in very fragmentary form by
(1) some of the diaries allegedly found by the Germans on the corpses
in the graves at hatyn and (2) eyewitness accounts by a very small
number of survivors of the camps, whom the Soviet authorities sepa
rated from the outbound convoys during the course of the railway
trip. The points on which this evidence agrees are as follows;

In the case of most of the prisoners from the Kozielsk camp, they
were loaded into railway prison cars at Kozielsk. The traiin carried
them first to Smolensk, From there it continved a short distance
westward to the rural station of Gnyezdovo. Here they were taken
from the train, loaded into autobuses and driven away into the
neighboring woods in batches of about 30 every half hour. The same
buses returned to the train after these trips to pick v> further
groupse In the woads the prisoners were unloaded from the buses and
were searched again. Watches and other small effects were taken from
them. Here the account breaks off in the few diaries on the Katyn
corpses that carry it this fare 2/

le Evidence of the cessation of mail from the three special camps is
contained in a communication from the Polish Red Cross at Warsaw,
dated March 18, 1941, to the International Red Cross at Geneva,
in reply to an inquiry of the latter of January 29, 1941. In
this communication the Polish Red Cross stated that it had ree
ceived letters from the Polish officers! prisoner of war camps in
the USSR until the spring of 1940, after which this mail had
suddenly ceased until November 1940, when a small number of letters
had again come through. (Apparently those that came during and
after November 1940 were from the small number of officers who had
been transferred to the Gryazovyets campe)

Re Facts and Documents, pages 6 4-74. In addition to the evidence
of the diaries, at least one eye~witness survived who accompanied
the convoys as far as Gnyezdovo and succeeded in getting a glimpse
of his fellow-prisoners being unloaded from the train there, before he was separated from them and transferred to another Soviet
prison camp. More than a year later he was released to join the
anders armye

 

     
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O2 5 6

 
RESTRICTED &

Gnyezdovo is the first railwey station before Katyn, and the
woods referred to were the Katyn woodSe

In the case of the prisoners from the Starobielsk camp the
testimony is more fragmentary still. All that is known is that they
apparently were taken by rail to Kharkov and thence b; automobile
to a further, unknown destination.

Ee Survivors Of The Special Camps, 1940-41 2/

ASoviet hope of converting some of the prisoners into officers
of a Communist-led Polish army to be formed on Sovict soil apparently
accounts for the survival of a handful of the original inmates of the
three campse Those selected for such a role numbered at least 448
and were transferred to other special camps either before or during
the liquidation of the three camps. For example, 150 who were convoyed out of Kozielsk-in the sixteenth batch to leave that camp, on
April @6, 1940, were sent to a special camp at Pavlishtchev Bor and
subsequently to another one at Gryazovyets, where they were subjected
to Soviet political propaganda and later to pressure to join the Red
Armye The remainder of the 448 likewise arrived at @ryazovyets, in
June 1940. Few gave in to the Soviet pressure. The Gryazovyets
camp was turned over to General Anders after the Soviet-—Polish pact
of July 30, 1941, and the majority of its inmates in this way were
rejoined to the mainstream of Polish life. As scen above, it was
these survivors at Gryazovyets who were able to supply the Polish
exile authorities with some of the primary testimony regarding the
three camps at which most of the missing 15,000 ol figere and men had
last been seen.

Fe Polish Search For The Missing Officers, 1941-43 3/

The Polish exile government during 1939-41 was aware of the
presence of large numbers of Polish prisoners of war in the USSR am
even possessed some specific information regarding the Location of the
special comps for officers, thanks to underground reports from Poland
based on letters received by relatives of the officers.

After the German military attack on the USSR in June 1941 and
resultant reestablishment of diplomatic relations between the Soviet
Government and the Polish Governmen’t in exile, the latter proceeded
under a Polish-Soviet agreement of July 30, 1941, to try to locate
Polish prisoners of war and interned civilians in the USSR and to

l. Facts and Documents, pages 95-96.
ee Facts and Decummts, pages 111-132.
Se Facts and Documents, pages 138-223.

 

 

     
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O2 ot G

 
RESTRICTED 9;

form them into a Polish army to fight Hitler. A Soviet—Polish military
agreement signed August 14, 1941, provided for the release by the
Soviet authorities of all such prisoners of war to General Anders,
commander of the Polish units that were to be formede In the

search for former prisoners of war on Soviet soil Anders soon found
that thousands of the officers known to have been hel. there in 1939
and 1940 could not now be located. The Soviet Government professed
ignorance of their whereabouts and denied that they were still being
held. The problem of the missing officers became one of the thorniest
questions in the dealings between the Polish md Sovict governments
between July 1941 and the end of 1942.

The official exchanze Polish inquiries and Soviet denials con
cerning these missing officers extended over a period of a yeare On
July 5, 1941, Polish Premier Sikorski told Soviet Ambassador Maisky
in London that the Polish Government estimated there were at least
191,000 ranks and 9,000 Polish officers held prisoner in the USSR (an
estimate apparently based on published Soviet statements referring to
the number of Polish prisoners taken in the September 1939 campaign).
In contrast, at the first meeting of the joint Polish-Soviet commission
for organization of a Polish army in the USSR on august 16, 1941, the
Sovict representative, General Panfilov, declared to General Anders that
there were only somewhat more than @1,000 Polish war prisoners in the
USSR. anders reportcd to Sikorski on September 7 that he ned so far
located about *&7,000 ranks and 1,800 officerse On September 9 the
Soviet representative gave Anders a revised estimate to the effect
that there were some 42,000 Polish prisoners of war on Soviet territory,
of whom he said 355,891 had already been released and were en route to
join Anders. On September 17 Anders was told by the Soviets that
46,195 prisoners of war had been released. From about the middle of
October 1941 the Soviet Government uniformly insisted, in all its replies to Polish inquiries, that all Polish prisoners of wer in the
USSR had by now been set free to join Anders.

Anders had discovered by that time, however, th:.s the former
prisoners joining his amy included relatively few ofvicers —— fewer
by several thousands than he had expected. During November and
December 1941 the Poles repeatedly took up this question at the
highest level with the Soviet Governmente On November 14 Kot, the
Polish Ambassador, obtained an interview with Premier Stalin at
which he informed Stlin that the thousands of Polish officers removed
from the Komielsk, Starobielsk and Ostashkov camps in the spring of 1940
were still missing and asked for their release. Stalin expressed the
conviction that all had been released, and that many had perhaps
failed to appear owing to their subsequent escape abroad. However
Stalin relayed Kot's question to the NKVD during the interview, but
dropped the subject after receiving a reply from the NKVD by telephone.
Premier Sikorski, during his official visit to Moscow of Desember 1941,
likewise broached to Stalin the question of the missing officers. Stalin

RESTRICTED

 

 

 

 
RESTRICTED 10

reiterated the Soviet claim that all had been released, and told Sikorski
that if any had failed to turn up it was probably because of the time
required for them to make their way from distant parts of the USSR.

From this and other high-level statements of Soviet leaders, some hope
sprung up among the Polish leaders that the missing officers had been
interned in camps of the far north and’ would indeed eventually appear,

During the first weeks of 1942 Joseph Czapski, an officer of
Anders? army, traveled to NKVD headquarters in several parts of the
USSR on an official assignment from Anders to try to obtain from
NKVD sources some indication of the possible fate of the missing
officers, Czapski met with no success,.

The Polish exile authorities continued to press the Soviet
Government during the first half of 1942, without result. On March
18, 1942, General Anders handed Stalin a list of 4,518 names of
missing Polish officers, representing 50 percent of the prisoners
deported from the Kozielsk, Starobielsk and Ostashkov camps in the
spring of 1940, compiled with great difficulty at anders! headquarterse
He told Stalin that so far not a single officer deported from those
camps had reappeared, and he asked where they could bee Stalin re~
plied that he did not know, and added that it might be they had been
in camps in territory taken by the Germans and were later dispersed.
This was the first Soviet suggestion that the missing officers might
have been captured by the Germans in 1941.

Anders and his army were transferred from the USSR to the
Middle East in the summer of 1942 without ever having found more than
a handful of the officers who had been in the three camps during 1939~
1940. On July 8, 1942, the matter was brought up for the last time
at an interview in Kuibyshev between the Polish Ambassador, Kot, and
Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Vishinsky.e On this occasion Vishinsky
declared that there were no Poles whom the Soviet Government was still
detaining in prisons or camps and that no Polish officers remained in
the Soviet Union outside of anders! forces. He suggested that some of
the missing officers might have previously escaped abroad, and that
others might heve diede 1/

1. The principal Soviet-Polish diplomatic interviews at which the subject of the missing officers was discussed were as follows:
October 6, 1941, Ambassador Kot and Deputy Foreign Commissar
Vishinsky; October 14, 1941, Kot — Vishinsky; October ek, 1941,
Kot and Foreign Comuissar Molotov; November @, 1941, Kot —
Vishinsky; Novanber 5, 1941, ambassador Cripps anu Vishinsky;.
November: 12, 1941, Kot — Vishinsky; November 14, 1941, Kot and
Stalin; March 18, 1942, General Anders and Stalin; July 8, 1942,
Kot ~ Vishinsky} November 15, 1941, Kot—Ifolotov; December 3, 1941,
Premier Sikorski and Stalin.

SERED

 

     
  

DECLASSIFIED

: Authority 3 O? S( 6.

 
 

 

RESTRICTED 12

The Polish Embassy at Kuibyshev also received an aide-memoire
from the NKVD on July 10, 194%, which repeated the assertions already
made by other Soviet authoritics. It declared that the Polish claims
regarding the missing officers were erroneous and were based on the
untrustworthy recollections of a small number of former prisoners of
ware It added that if some former prisoners had not yet been traced
by the Polish Government, the explanation might be (1) their release
and return to Poland prior to 1941, or (2) their escape abroad after
their release in 1941, or (3) their accidental death while making
their way from camps in the far Soviet north after being released in
1941.

Simultaneously with its search for the missing officers in the
USSR, the Polish Government conducted,. through its highly-organized
underground movement in German—-occupied Poland, a search in the home—
land for the missing men, on the hypothesis that some of them might
have escaped from the USSR and arrived there. None were found. Likce
wise, prisoner-of-war camps in Germany were canvassed by the same
Polish underground agencies, without resulte

Owing to the fruitlessness of the exhaustive search that had thus
been conducted not only in the USSR but in Poland and Germany as well,
hope of finding the missing officers declined among the Polese Early
in 1943 articles in the Polish exile press expressed the conviction
that they had met a tragic fatee It was at this juncture that the
Germans disclosed to the world the Katyn mass graves, which appeared
conclusively to prove what had happened to at least a wrt of the
missing PolcsSe

Ge Revelation Of The Katyn Graves By The Germans, April 1943

The disclosure of the mass graves at Katyn was first made by the
Germans at the beginning of April 1945 to groups of representative.
Poles in Grman-occupied Poland, a few days before the existence of
the graves Was announced to the world. These Polish representatives
were told by an official of the German Ministry of Propaganda that
mass graves of Polish prisoners executed by the Sovict authorities
had been discovered near Smolensk by the German military authorities.

On April 10 the first Polisn delegation to inspect the graves
was taken to Katyn by the Germans. It was composed of welfare officials, writers, a worker and several newspaper mene They were shown
two mass graves and some 250 exhumed bodies, and were told that an
estimated total of 1,000 bodies lay buried in the immediate vicinity.
The Germans informed this group of Poles that Polish laborers working
near Katyn had learned of the graves as early as October 1942, but
that the German authorities head been told of themMlyin February 1943.

& second delegation from occupied Poland, consisting mainly of

TRICTED

 
RESTRICTED 12

representatives of the Polish Red Cross, was taken to Katyn a few days
after the first, and after its return the Secretzry General of the
Polish Red Cross gave the Executive Council of that organization on
April 16 his eye-witness report, confirming that the corpses of
executed Polish officers lay at Katyne Some members cf this delegation
remained at Katyn to participate in the further exhumation and identi~
fication of bodiese The Germans also brought delegations of Polish
officers from German prisoner-of-war camps to view the gravese

The German authorities tried unsuccessfully to elicit statenmts
from the Polish delegations that could be exploited in German propaganda.
The Polish Red Cross, in particular, refused to do more than cooperate
in investigating the Katyn graves. While all of the Poles taken to see
the graves were convinced of their authenticity, most of them remained
suspicious of the motives and explanations of the Germans.

First-hand testimony regarding the Katyn find reached the Polish
underground “army of the Homeland" (AK, Armja Krajowa), and thence the
Polish Government in Exile in London, owing to tue action of the AK
comeander=—in—chief, General "Bor" (General Tadeusz Komorowski), who
succeeded in having one of his personal aides included as an ovserver
in the second Polish delegation taken to Katyn by the Germans. This
observer brought back to "Bor" specimens of the bullets, cartridge cases
and other evidence found on the bodies, as well as diaries and identity
p2perse He also reported that the graves probably did not contain many
more than 4,000 corpses, instead of the 10 — 12,000 claimud by the
GermanSe &

Meanwhile the Germans began on April 15 to publish news of the
Katyn graves to the world. The first German communiqu., issued that
day, announced that the graves had been discovered "a few days earlier"
by the German military authoritics through "hints" given by the local
inhabitants. It declared that the bodies in the graves were those of
Polish officers who had been the victims of "Jewish—Bolshevik bestia
lity", and it estimated their number at more than 10,000. The comnuni-~
que added that their execution had apparently taken place in the spring
of 1940, because the local inhabitants had testified that the officers
hed errived at the nearby railway station of Gnyezdovo betweem March
and May of that year, and because spruce trees "now three years old
were growing on the gravese It also stated that the bodies and their
Polish uniforms were well preserved, and that they bore identification
documents, Giaries and other papers, but no jewelry or watches.

le Facts and Documents, pages 229-35.
Re Te Bor-Komorowski, The Secret Army (London, Gollancz, 1951) page 130,

RESTRICTED

 

 
 

 

RESTRICTED 13

The German announcement aroused considerable intsrest abroad,
where few had becn aware of the disappeerance of the Polish army
officers and of the attempt of the Polish Government since 1941 to
discover their whereabouts. There was some tendency at first, especially in the Allied countries, to discount the entire Katyn story as a
fabrication of Gocbbels' propaganda apparatus. During April and May
1943 the German radio issued almost daily communiques concerning the
progress made in investigeting the graves, as part of en elaborate
propaganda cbviously aimed at discrediting the Soviet Government in
the vicw of the Western Allics. The names and descriptions of those
corpses tiat were identified were read cver the German radio, some—
times with excerpts from diaries found on the bodies, in order to
reinforce the impression of authenticity and to inflame still further
the feelings of the Poles in the Western camp against the USSR.

The climax of the German propaganda campaign was reached on
April 28 — 50, 1943, when the German Government brought to Katyn
what purported to be an expert comuission of twelve physicians —
mainly professors of forensic medicine and criminology —- from four
German-occupied countries (Belgium, Denmark, Holland and Czechoslovakia ),
six countries allicd with Germany, Bulgaria, Finlana, Croatia, Rumania,
Slovakiz, Hungery),and Switzerlande This commission interviewed several
witnesses from among the locrzl Kussian population, investigested the
work of exhumetion already carried out, and performed post mortcm ex~
aminetions on scveral corpsese At the request cf the Germans it
issued a protucol describing what it nad found. Inter alia the protocol stated the followings:

(1) Seven mass graves had been found end opened, of which the
largest was estimated to contain 2,500 bodies. (2) 98% bodies had been
xxhuned to date, of which 70 percent had been identified. (3) A411 ttle
victims so far examined had apparently been killed by a pistol shot at
close ronge in the back of the head; all wounds were identiccl and
indicsted experienced exccutionerse (4) On many bodies the arms were
tied together with cord, and some bodies showed signs of having been
pierced by a four-~edged bayonete V (5) The young spruce trees
found growing on the graves were at least: five yverrs old od had been
transplanted to thet place three years before, ieee, in the spring of
1940. 2/ (6) The bodies so far exhumed were Cressed in authentic

le A type of bayonet allegedly used only in the Sovict irmye (Facts
and Documents, page 2872) The protocol also stated that the binding
of arms end method of shooting appeared to be exactly the same as
in the case cr numerous kussian civilians also dug up in Katyn
forest but executed and buricd there before the war.

ee This differed from the statement in the first German communique, that
the trees were three years cold. In 4 newspaper interview, Prof. ]
Edward }ileslavich, the Croatian memocr of the commission, stated
that cross sections oi these spruces showed five cnnual rings, with
the middle one underdeveloped, indicating the year of transplanting,
iee., 1940. (Facts and Documents, page £88.)

 

RESTRICTED

 

 

 
 

RESTRICTED 14

Polish uniforms, well—fitting and properly arranged, indicating that
they were the same ones worn at the time of execution. The clothing
was of winter type, including furs, jerkins, pullovers and scarves.
(7) Documents found on the exhumed bodies referred to the period from
the autumn of 1959 to March and April 1940, no later. (8) No insects
nor traces of insects were found on the budies, indicating that burial
must have taken place in winter or spring, prior to the emergence of
insects.

As the exhumation of bodies proceeded during April and May
1945, the Germans reduced their estimate of the todal number of bodies
buried at Katyne On April &6 a German spokesman put the number at
8,000 to 9,000 and declared that the marshy location of part of the
eraves would probably make it impossible to exhume all of these. On
June 1 an eighth Polish grave was discovered, but apparently it contained few more than 100 bodies. 1/ Two days later the Germans
discentinued the exhumationse Up to that time 4,143 bodies had been
recovered and examined. German propaganda explained the cessation of
the work of exhumins bodies on the ground that the onset of summer
heat had rendered work in the graves unhyginic and difficult. Polish
exile circles, however, after careful analysis of the dimmsions of
the eight mass graves and other data published by the Germans, came
to the conclusion that all the sraves together could never have con—
tained many more bodies than the number fhe Germans had already
claimed to have exhumed, i.e., slightly more than 4,000 although this
wes less then half the number of oodies originally estimated by
German propaganda es lying in the graves. They therefore concluded
that the real reason for the breaking off of the investigations at
Katyn by the Germans was that the latter had discovered there were
no more bodies to exhume.

Whether or not this was the true explanation of the German
action, the Germans never subsequently announced a resumption of
their exhuminz operations at Katyn. The 4,143 bodies they had exhumed up to June 3 remained at the Katyn woods, reinterred in new
pravese At the end of September 1943 the German armies were driven
out of the resion of which Katyn was a part, and the graves came under
Soviet controle

Meanwhile, in mid-September, the German Government published
its official version of the investigaticn held the previous spring.
The 350-pace volume, entitled Amtliches Material zum Massenmord von
Katyn ("Official Material On The liass Murder Of Katyn") was to remain the most comprehensive compilation of the evidence from the

  

le Facts and Documents, pase 65l.
&e Facets and Documents, paje 329.

RESTRICTED

 

    
  

DECLASSIFIED

Authority 30256

 
 

RESTRICTED 15

German sidee This included, principally, the reports of the German
Secret Field Police concerning the exhumations; their records of
interrogations of Russinn witnesses; the lengthy report of the chief
police surgeon who examined the bodies, Professor Gerhard Buhtz; and
a reprint of the protocol of the German—sponsored intermational
medical commission, dated 4pril 50, 1945.

He Polish And Soviet Reactions To The German Reve lations

Following the German announcement on april 13, 1943, of the
discovery of the graves at Katyn, the other two principally interested
parties, the Soviet Government and the Polish Government in Exile,
reacted as follows;

(1) On April 15 the Soviet Government issued its first communique on the subject. It vehemently denounced as "vile fabrications" of
"Goebbels! slandsrers" the German assertion that the victims found
near Katyn had been murdered by Sovict euthorities in the spring of
1940. It atreed, however, that the "German—Fuscist reports on this
subject leave no doubt as to the trngic fate of the former Polish
prisoners of war." These, it counter—charged, "in 1941 were @ gazed
in construction work in areas west of the Smolensk rezion md fell
into the hands of the German-Frscist hangmen in the summer of 1941,
after the withdrowel of Soviet troops from the Smolensk area.!t

(2) On April 17 the Polish Government announced in London that
it hac approached the Internation:1 hed Cross in Geneva that same day
with a request that the latter send a delegation of neutral persons
. to Katyn to investigate the German charrese

(5) On April 17 the Soviet Government issued a second communiQue depreciating the evidence offered by the Germans and accusing them
of havin; staged the Katyn discovery, with the aid of Polish personal
identity documents taken from the archives cf the Gestapo and planted
on the bediese

(4) On April 19 the leadin:: Soviet daily newspaper Pravda
published »m editorial in which it denounced the Polish request made
to the International lied Cross and accused the Polish tcaders of
havine in an "inexcusable manner fallen prey to the wily provocations
of Goebbels."

(5) On April 20 the Polish Government presented 2. note to the
Soviet mbassador in London, pvintin,; out that the Soviet communique
of April 15 seemed to indicate that the Soviet Government possessed
more ample information regardin;: the missing Polish officers than it
had communicated to the Polish Government in reply to the queries of
the latter curing 1941 and 194, and requesting that it now sive the
Polish Governmunt this informatione (No Soviet reply to this note

RESTRICTED

 

 

 

 

 
RESTRICTED 16

was received by the Polese)

(6) On April 20 the International Ked Cross informed the Polish
Government, in reply to the latter's request of April 17, that it could
not send investigators to Katyn except with the consent of all the
parties interested in the dispute. It sug,ested that the Polish
Government approach the Soviet Government with a request that the
latter asree to such an investigation. (Throughout the subsequent
proceedinss the Soviet Government never volunteered its coneent to
such an investigation, )

(7) On April 26 the Soviet Governmmt notified the Polish
Government that it had decided to sever relations with the latter, on
the grounds that the Polish Government had "taken up" and "fanned" the
German propaganda charges regarding Katyn in order to "exert pressure
on the Sovict Government, by makin: use of the slanderous Hitlerite
f.ke for the purpose of wrestins territorial concessions" from the
USSRe (This was a reference to Polish refusal to concede current
moet claims to all of prewar Polish territory east of the Curzon
Line.

Followin,; the break in relations, the Soviet Government through
iis propaganda media continued to direct scathing attacks at the
Polish Government in London for the alleged credence given by the
i tter to the German account of the Katyn massacre. A lending article
in Izvestia of April &7 claimed to see in this a Polish aim of dis—
crediting the USSR in order to obstruct Soviet claims to the territory
east of the Curzon Linee Subsequent Soviet propavanda against the
Polish Government put increasin;: emphasis on this territorial issue.

Ie The Soviet Investization Of The Katyn Graves 1943-1:)44

The Red Army retook Smola@sk at the end of September 1945 and
drove the Germans out of the locality of Katyn early in Octobere The
mass craves thereby came under Soviet control, where they have remained.

Following the tripartite declaration of the US, UK and USSR on
November 1, 1943, regardin; war crimes, the Soviet Government on
November & decreed the establishment of an Extraordinary State Commis—
Sion to investizate German war crimese One of the earliest actions of

his Commission was en investigation of Katyne For this purpose it
appointed a Special Commission, headed by the Academician M.N,. Burdenko,
which in turn summoned a panel of Soviet medico-lezal experts to examine the bodies in the Katyn graves. On January 16, 1944, according
to the report of these experts, Katyn was visited and the sraves were
opencd. During the following week, January 16-R3, 925 bodies were
exhumed and subjected to examination, and testimony was taken from

over 100 witnesses. On January e@2 a number of foreisn press corres

RESTRICTED

 

 
RESTRICTED 17

pondents and other foreigners residing in the USSR, including Miss

Kathleen Harriman, daughter of the US Ambassador, visited Katyn on

invitation of the Soviet awthorities and witnessed some of the proceedings.

On January 24, 1944, the Special Comission signed its report,
subsequently published under the title, "The Truth About Katyne" Its
principal points were as follows:

(1) That there were Polish war prisoners working on roads
and quartered in three special camps in the region of Katyn in the
summer of 1941 when the Germans captured the regione (On this point
little evidence was given beyond the bare assertion, and the identity
of these prisoners with those from the earlier camps at Kozielsk,
Starobielsk and Ostashkov was left to inference rather than proven.
The Poles later cited cases of Polish prisoners who fell into German
hands near Smolensk and later cscaped, as proof that prisoners in
that area had no necessary identity with the lost Polish officers. 1/)

(2) That these prisoners fell into the hands of the Germans
during July 1941 because the Soviet authorities found it impossible
to evacuate them in time. (The Report printed the testimony of
several local Soviet officials to prove that railway cars were un—
available to transport the prisoners eastward before the Germans
arrived. The Poles, however, later argued that Polish prisoner~of~
war camps in other parts of the USSR were evacuated on foot ahead of
the German advance, and that the alleged inability to cvacuate the
camps near Katyn throws further doubt on the existence of such camps. 2/)

(3) That Polish prisoners cof war taken from captured Soviet
camps were held by the Germans in the Katyn are® in the la te summer
of 1941. (The Report cites testimony of local Russian witnesses on
this point, and states that the Germans guarded these Polish prisoners
so strictly that not one succeeded in escaping and getting back to
Poland. On this point the Poles raise the question why no Polisn
prisoner should have been able to escape the Germans at Katyn, when
elsewhere in the war zone such prisoners succeeded in escaping in
considerable numbers. 3/)

(4) The captured Polish prisoners were executed by the Germans
in Katyn Wood at the end of August and beginning of September 1941.
(The Report, while unable to adduce eyewitness accounts of the alleged
execution, cited the testimony of Russian domestics unployed at the
German staff headquarters in Katyn concernin;: suspicious movements
of the German officers at that period; statements of local Russian
residents that they had scen an unspecified number of Polish war
prisoners brought in batches by German soldiers to the Katyn Wood at
unspecified times, and had heard shots in the Wood; and statemmts of

l. Facts and Documents, paces 365-365.
@. Facts and Documents, pages 552-358,.
Se Facts and Docunents, pages 361-365.

PESTRICTED

 

     
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O2 5 G

 
 

RESTRICTED 18

two Smolensk officials that they had heard from German officers during
the occupation in September 1941 that Polish prisoners of war in the
locality were to be exterminated.

(5) That the Germans "framed" their Katyn story in the spring do
1943 and forced loccl Russian residents to give false witness for that
purpose; that they also exhumed 211 of the Katyn bodies in March of
thet year, reneved all documents dated later than April 1940, and re~
buried the corpses, using for this work some 500 Russien prisoners of
war whom they afterward shote (Polish commentators argue that it would
have been impossible to carry out this task in the space of a month and
to have left no traces of the tamperinge They point out, furthermore,
that the Soviet authorities, in taking testimony from Russian witnesses
eorlier questioned by the Germans, could force them to swear f.lsdly as
easily as the Germans allegedly had donee 2/)

(6) That despite previous German removel of documents and vale
uables from the corpses, papers and valuables were still found on many
of the bodies, including documents deted mich later than the spring of
1940 when, accerding to the German story, the victims had been executed
by the Seviet authorities. (Polish com ientaries express suspicion over
the circumstance that the Soviet investigation at Katyn, hastily con~
ducted on 925 corpses which had already been carefully searched by the
Germans, should have turned up so many allegedly important documents md
veluables —- all of them, according to the Sovict report, on the first
hundred corpses re-exhumed. They also point out that none of the doc
uments which the Soviet Commission claimed to have found were personal
docummts of the victims, and that all but one (an "“icon") had either
been issued by the Soviet outhorities thanselves or had passed through
their hands. 3/)

Jo The Katyn Question Before The International Military Tribunal, 1946

ifter the Soviet investigation in January 194<, the Katyn
episode received comparatively little further publicity until the
end of the ware Only the Polish leaders in exile continued to explore
and agitate the question of cuilt.

&t the end of 1945, however, the Soviet Government indicated tht
it would demand inclusion of its version of the Katyn atfair in the indictment of leading German war criminals. On February J«<, 1946, the
USSR submitted the report of the Sovict Special Commission of January
e4, 1944, entitled "The Truth About Katyn," as part of its case against

le Facts sana Documents, pages 566-378, 431-45c.
@e Facts and Documents, pages 580-3596.
3. Facts and Documents, pazes 599 and 406.

RESTRICTED

 

    
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O? S( G.

 
RESTRICTED 19

Germany before the International Military Tribunal at Nurnberg. 1/

On July 1, 1946, the International Military Tribunal listened to
the German defense against the charges relating to Katyn, as well as
the Soviet counsel's argument on the subject. The Germans produced three
witnesses, including German officers who had been attached during the
latter part of 1941 and 194e to the army headquarters stationed in
Katyn Wood, then under German military occupation. These witnesses
repeated the German story of the finding of the Katyn graves by Polish
prisoners working in the vicimity in 1942, and of their having been
subsequently reported to the German authorities.

The Soviet counsel likewise produced three witnesses. The first
was Bazilevsky, a resident of Smolensk, who repeated. his testimony that
Menshesin, a wartime collaborator who had acted as mayor of Smolensk for
the Germans, had confided in him in the autumn of 1941 that the Germans
had executed all Poles aR the special camps near Katyne

The second Scviet wilson wes Dr. Marko antonov Markov of Bulganiia,
who had been a member of the commission cf medico-legil experts taken
to Katyn by the Germans on April 28, 1945. In spite of the fact that
Dr. Markov had signed the protocol of that commission which declared,
inter alia, that the Katyn corpses appeared to have been buried in 1940,
he now testi fied (for the Soviet prosecutor) that he hac really believed
at that time that the bodies were only 1 —- ls years desd —— iec., that
they had been buried in 1941 or 1942. He implied thzt other mq@mbers of
the commission had actual ly- been of the same opinione

The third Soviet witness was Victor Ilich Prosorovsky, head of.
the panel of Medico-legal experts that had reexamined the Katyn bodies
for the Soviet Government in January 1944. Prosorovsky's testimony
cited the documents of allesed late date found on.some of the bodics.e
He also testified that the bodies showed evidence of having been shot
in a manner employed generally by the Germans in executions Garreet out
by them in the USSR during ey wartime occupation.

The testimony rg Sisk ee Katyn adduced before - the International
Vilitery Tribunal added nothing essentizlly new to the German allegations
against the Scviet Government first put forward in the spring of 1943,
nor to the Soviet ccunterscharses as publisfed in final form in
_Jamuery 1944. The defense put “forward at Nurnberg from the German side
attempted to prove, by means of the testimony of German army cfficers
who had been stationed et Ketyn during the period named in the Soviet

le References to Katyn in the records of the Nurnberg trial as follows:

Trial of Major War Criminals Before the International Military
Tribunal, Vol. I, puses 48-54; VII, 486; IX, 5; XIII, 450; XV, 289,
292, 414; XVII, &74-371, and XXII, 29.

RESTRICTED

 

     
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O? 5 G

 
 

RESTRICTED 20

accusations, that no executions hac been carried out there at that period.
In the cross examination of these German witnesses, the Soviet counsel
attempted to cast doubt on their testimony. The results were wholly
inconclusive, and in the avsence of Soviet witnesses capable of civing
conclusive substantiation to the Soviet case, the Katyn charges were
allowed to drop out of the indictment under which the Nazi leaders were
eventually convicted of war crimes ;uilte

IV. THE GHiMAN ACCOUNT OF THE KATYN GRAVES

The official German account of the discovery of the Katyn graves,
which varied from time to time in certain minor details, can be recapitul=ted as follows;

The existence of the graves was first known to the local Russian
populetione From the latter it was learned of in the fell of 1948 by
seversl Polish prisoners employed as laborers in the vicinity by the
German occupation authoritiese The Polish prisoners searched for and
found the eraves and erected two’crosses on them. Local German military
personnel heard of the graves at about the same time but at first attached
no sienificance to theme Early in February 1945 the German Field Police
exncavated one of the graves and beran to question the local Russian
inhabitants about them. From the latter they learned that prisoners of
war had been unloaded in the woods from trucks by the Sovict authorities
during four or five weeks in the spring of 1940. This testimony was
forwarded to the headquarters of the Central Army Group, which thereupon
ordered exhumation of the bodies and sent its chief police surgeon,
Buhtz, to examine the bodies. Systematic exhumations and post mortem
examinations were bemin under Buhtz's direction on March 29, 1943, and
a mere intensive questioning of the 1lvcal population was carried out
between April 1 and April 6.

The German account concluded that between 10,000 and 12,000 Polish
prisoners of war (the estimate was recuced to 8,000 — 9,000 in a later
German estimate) had been brought to Katyn woods by the Soviet authorities
in March, April and May 1940, executed there en masse and buried in
mass fravese

V. POLISH APPialSaL OF THE GEXIi.N ACCOUNT

Polish political emigres were suspicious of German motives when
the German Katyn story was put forward in 1945. Then and later, however,
the Polish investizators and commentators who have analyzed the Katyn
date most carefully have found fewer questions to raise against the
German account than against the official Soviet rebuttal. In their

TRICTED

 

 

    
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O? 5 bs

 
 

RESTRICTED el

Opinion the German story on the .hole hangs together successfully, though
it contains certain discrepancies and relies on witnesses who were under
German controle Polish criticism of the German account is Ss largely con~
fined to such peints as the followin;z:

(1) The German description of the mass graves and their contents
was based on an investigation conducted almost exclusively by Germans
ond by a few nomGermans selected by the German Government. Hence there
can be no certainty that the allegedly expert opinions issued by the
investigators were freely arrived at and corresponded with scientific
accuracy to the conditions found in the graves.

(2) According to the German account, the Katyn bodies had lain
in the mass graves exactly three years when they were first exhumed; yet
they were found well priserved. While good preservation after so long
a time may not be precluded, confirmation by independent experts would
have made the allegation more credible. as it was, the opinicn of the
German<spensored medico—legal- experts pel noch the S—-year burial period
wes flatly contradicted by the opinion of the Soviet experts that the
bodies could have been buried enly a year and a half at moste

(3) The German account grossly exaggerated the number of bodies
lying in the graves. Tne figure of 10,000 first announced by the
Germans wes obviously dvrived from published Soviet figures regarding
the number of Polish officers taken prisoner by the Soviet army in 1939,
indicating that the Germans were primarily bent on makins a propaganda
story that would account for the cisappesrance of all the Polish officer
priscners of war in the USSIt, rather than divulging the true number
of bodies in the sravese

(4) - The testimony taken by the Germans from some of the Russian
witnesses wis improbable and sug jested fabrication by the German authorities. Thus two witnesses testified that as many as three or four railway convoys daily of Polish prisoners were brought to Gnyezdovo in the
spring of 1940, an implausibly high figure in the light of careful Polish
calculations regarding the number of corpses actually found in the graves,
and probably fabricated for the purpose of Supporting the German claims
concerning an enormous number of Katyn victims.

VIe THE OFFICIAL SOVIET EXPLANATION OF KATYN

The Soviet explanation of the Katyn mass graves was put forward
in April 1948, immediately after publication of the German story, for
the purpose of refuting the latter. Later it was elaborated and, in
some respects, altered.

In the first, unclaborated version, the Sovictsclaimed the

LESTRIC

   
 

RESTRICTED 22

followings The Polish officers from the Kozielsk, Starobielsk and
Ostashkov camps had been moved from those camps in 1940 and in the
summer of 1941 were enxyazed in construction work on roads west of
Smolensk. There they fell into German hands, after the withdrawal

of Sovict troops followin; the German military attack on the USSR. They
were undoubtedly killed by their German captors and buried in the mass
graves; or (as a second communique asserted at this time), more probably,
part had been killed at once but others had been kept alive until 1942
or 1943, then killed by the Gestapo and placed with the other corpses,
along with documents taken from the Gestapo archives.

The more elaborate version of the Sovict case was contained in
the report of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission sent to Katyn to ine
spect the graves in January 1944. In this were specified three special —
camps in which the missing officers were alleged to have been quartered,,
west of Smolensk, in the summer of 1941. Reasons and testimony were
adduced, purporting to prove that the Soviet local authorities had
found it technically impossible to evacuate these Polish prisoners in
July 1941 and that they had therefor fallen into the hands of the ine
vading German army. Other evidence was adduced, purporting to prove
thet they had been seen in German custody in this area by Russian wit—
nesses during July-September 1941. The report alleged that the mass
shocting of these prisoners had been carried out by the Germans during
August and September 1941, and that later the Germans had suborned
-witnesses, tampered with the documents on the bodies and secretly
executed several hundred Soviet prisoners whom they had used as gravee
digcers for the Polish officers.

Still more detail was added to the Soviet claims at the Mirnberg
trials of German war criminals in the summer of 1946. Here the Soviet
case alleged that the mass executions had been carrivd out by special
SS detachmmts from Smolensk in September 1941 while the 537th Signal
Regiment of the German Army had headquarters in the Katyn wood.

VII. POLISH QUESTIONS REGARDING SOVIET EXPLANATION

The official Soviet explanation of Katyn leaves a considerable
number of puzzling questions unanswered. These questions have been
set forth in greatest detail by the Polish political exiles, who in
the half-dozen years since the end of the war have subjected the
available evidence concerning Katyn to the must exhaustive scrutinye
Among the difficulties in the Soviet explanation pointed out by then,
and by others, are the followings

(1) As soon as the Germans proclaimed the discovery of the Katyn

graves, the Soviet Govermment issued an elaborate explanation, purporting
to account for every movement of the Polish officers frum 1940 until

RESTRICTED

 

     
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 5 O2 5 G

 
 

RESTRICTED 23

the alleged date of their capture and murder by the Germans. Yet prior

to this time the Soviet Government had met Polish inquiries with professions of complete ignorance as to the fate of the officers. If the
Soviet Government prior to April 1943 possessed indications, or had
Suspicions, of a German crime of the magnitude of Katyn, why did it
conceal them, when their revelation would presumably have satisfied
Polish inquiries and contributed to the Soviet propaganda against Germany?

It has been pointed out, in answer to this cifficulty, that
buresucratic confusion and the pressures of wartime could have prevented
the Soviet Government from tracing the lost Polish officers prior to
1943. Yet the alacrity with which the Soviet Government came forward
in April 1943 with an account of their movements between 1940 and 1941
throws doubt on this execuse.

(2) The official Soviet explenation of Katyn charged that the
Germans had secr tly removed from the corpses all documents of a later
date than April 19040 (afterward executing some 500 Soviet prisoners of
wer who allezedly were used to remove the documents). This charge,
however, fails to account satisfactorily for the circumstance that
diaries found cn the bodies, seemingly intact and authentic, contain |
no entries later than April 1940.

The official Soviet account also states that a number of documents.
dated much later than April 1940, including some dated 1941, were found
cn the bodies by the Soviet Extraordinary Commission. According to the
Commission's account, these were found on the first hundred bodies exhumed. The Commission's report fails te explain why it cited docummts
only from the first hundred bodies, whereas it exhumed a total of 95
bodies -+—- a circumstance exposing the Soviet Government to the possible
charge of having itself planted such documents.on the topmost hundred
bodies. Moreover, the Soviet Government furnished no means of corroborating the authenticity of these documents and did not submit them as
evidence before the International Military Tribunal in 1946.

(3) The Sovict report claims that the Polish officers taken
from Kozielsk, Starobielsk ana Ostashkov in the spring of 1940 were
transferred to three special camps west of Smolensk, where they worked
on roads until the summer of 194le 4 number of Soviet witnesses were
adduced who testified to having seen Polish prisoners in that area
curing 1941. Yet the Seviet account feils to explain why these officers
{some of them wardisabled) were put at hard labor while Polish officers
at other Soviet camps were nots; or why none of the Soviet witnesses
specified that the Polish prisoners they had seen were officers. The
Soviet report also disregards an alternative explanation of these
encounters by the Soviet witnesses, namely that other Polish prisoners,
unconnected with the missing officers, were located in camps west of
Smolensk during 1940-41, as is indicated by independent testimony of
Poles who claimed to have sojourned in such camps.

_TESTRICTED

 

 

 
RESTRICTED 24

(4) After the liquidation of the Kozielsk camp in April 1940,
those of the inmates who were eventually transferred to the Gryazovyets
camp continued to receive mail sent to them from Poland. In the case
of the remaining prisoners, who vanished from view at that time and
whose bodics later were ivcntified at Katyn —— their fomilies who sent
them letters after april 1940 received such mail back again marked "Retour
—— Parti" ("Letter returned; addressee departed"). If these prisoners
were engazed in constructiun work in special camps west of Smolensk between April 1940 and June 1941, as the Suvict report states, why was
their mail not forwerded to then?

(5) In a number of cases, Polish officers shipped out of the
Kozielsk camp in April or May 1940 in the same convoy tugether were
found lying side by side in the same part of the mass rave when cxe
humec. by the Germanse How could this coincidence occur if, as the
Soviet report claims, they had been shifted about in the interval
(April 1940 = June 1941)’ on various road construction jobs in the
alleged camps near Smolensk?

(6) ‘The Katyn corpses were found clothed in winter overcoats,
and few if any insects, summer or otherwise, were found with the bodies.
The Sovict csse passes in silence over the difficulty of reconciling
these circumstinces with its allegation that the officers were executed
by the Germans in late summer.

(7) In its report on Katyn of January 1944 and in its case
presentec to the International }filitary Tribunel in 1946, the Soviet
Government used the figure 11,000 in referring to the number of Polish
prisoners which it accused the Germans of having killed at Katyn, ale
thouch only a few more than 4,000 bodies had been exhumed there and alk
thouch the dimensicns of the sraves suggest that not appreciably more
than this number could have been buried in theme Why did the Scviet
Government accept the fipure first given by the Germans for the total
number of bodies at Katyn, without publishing 1 independent estimate
of its own? By accepting the unproved and implausible German figure
the Soviet Government exposed itself to the charge of wanting to
account for all of the missing Polish officers by means of the Katyn
graves and to avoid the question whether a part of them had perished
elsewhere in the USS.

(8) aAmonz the iiussian witnesses quoted in the Soviet report of
Janusry 1944 was ene Moskovskaya, who testified that on a day in March
1943 she had encountered in the forest 2 runawcy Kussian war prisoner
who told her that he hac been one of several hundred br ought there to
diz up the bodies of Polish officers, remove documents from them, md
re-bury theme Moskovskaya's deposition included the statement that this
man had tole her that "at the besinning of April 1943 all of the work
planned by the Germans was epparently completed, as for three days not
one of the war prisoners hac to do any work." Jt is pointed out by

ES TRICTED

 

    
  

DECLASSIFIED

; Authority 3 O2 5 G

 
RESTRICTED

Polish comuentators that this statement makes Moskuvskaya's testimony
look like « careless fabrication of the Soviet authorities, since it

refers to a date in March 1943 yet purports to describe events that
occurred in Aprile 1/

le Facts and Documents, pases 387-388.

RESTRICTED

~ DECLASSIFIED

Aut hority VVD 302 156 6

 
