 

CULHtoOt4Ule

¢

~+

-”

. Objectives ware appraved by the

 

EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs

36 July 1984 ey |

MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPECTOR ORNERAL (1)

VIA ORPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)

SUBJECT: A. The Preatdent's Comznittes on International
indo~mation Activities: Report te the President
(Pages $9+4)),

Sb. TS €78336

  

mdations of the Presidant's Gommmittes
nternational Information Aativitien, the mission and operating chjectives
of the hmetian Gomamittas have been vedaiined, The new misaton and
) of State in & mamovandum dated
ae of the Divactor, Central Intelligence

  

12 July 1984 and aceapted by the ©
Agensy, on 2% July 1934,

 

Prime emphasis bas been placed on the development of Radio Liberation,
The physical tactlisian of Radia Liberation at its German base have bean)
eupanded and stabilised at a level consistent with both the tachniaal and
politizal gansidevaiions involved, tay, with the power of seven 10 kw
and two 3 kw tvanamitters using 18 high fy tied, Radio Liberation
directs ite broadsasts to Soviad avcupation fovoes in East Germany and |
Austria and te all of Zarapean USER, inchuding the Caucasus, and to Soviet
Gentval Asia, Broadvaste ave beamed to these avens 24 hones . day, soven

 

 

 

days a week, in Russlan and in moat of the ether major 1s :
Soviet Union, A imited expansion program has been ayproved fow tiacal
year 1985, daving which Radio Liberation will attempt te launch pilet apersNata tabcccaion teen tents A bak sa ssoun et te gente to

 

eviehtaed | avens ant te tote am of the Seale and to blanket hevie | Central Anis.

With tha dleselution of the Coordinating Genter in June of 1983, Radio
Liberation was (reed from interference and control of emigre politics and

 

[APPROVED FOR RELEASEL EL |

U P~o27824¢
DATE: 08-Feb-2011 | i ale estan

(V1)

 

¥¢

 

 
 

__

LuL434U0l2

 


olitiotans.

eT enaitha tae, mh sees eee Libdveiiox
“$0 ita besle concepts, The seegrecaning | 2 camnposed 1
yocent Soviet escapees who write and ortlaulate all of the va
te te this staff which enables Radio Liberation ts speak in a volee ond tre from
@ point of view which is mast usdaretandable te the peoples within the USER.
At thie writing, Radio Liberation is @ hard hitting, divact, tactleal weapon
in our propaganda warlave aysenal,

The effectivenses of Radio Libevation is attested to by mentoring
reports irom the tayget areas and by the statements of recent defectors.
and escapees, During daylight hours, even in December, the worat month,
Berlin monitors reported an naverage intelligible reception of about 604%,
and Visrma monitors 88%, The sumpner months show & considerably higher
level of intelligibiltty, renehing 100% on occasion at beth locations. An
embassy official in Mescow heard & Radio Liberation hyoadeast on 3 February
1984, Anethey American official heayd the vadio in Klev on 21 March 1954,
Similar evidence has trichied in from Tabria, Meshed, letanbul, Cyprus,
Helsinki, and Odessa,

 

Unsolicited favorable comment on Radio Liberation's program content
and personality have been recgived fram several persons in Western Europe.
reater interest are the vaporta of defectors, A Soviet Army

defector, ‘yaported that, while stationed with the Seviat
occupation forces in East Germany, he heard Radio Libsration broadenate
which led to his decision to defect in Decerber 1983. soviet |

who defacted in the summer of 1953, also satd he had beard Radia |
Liberation broadcasts iu East Germany, A Soviet of Avmeaian origin, |
picked up in Turkey in September 1953, heard Radio Liberation in the

! whe defected in carly 1954, raported

that he had Hetened In Basi Germany ta VOA, Radio Liberation, BBC,
Radio Rame, Radio Madrid, and cthare, "Personally", he sald, “I Mked
Radio Liberation best, since it knew hetter than all the others what life
was like tn occupied Germany." (Quote from Reuters. dispate:
1984.) A Balt who defected through Bast Germany in Suptomber 1985 stated
that he had heard Radle Liberation many times between April and August
1953) he aleo stated that he knew of Soviet occupation pavaonnel who lists
A Rusatan who fled from Hungary iu February 1954 said he had Ilstensd to
Radio Liberation many times in Hungary, and that many of his friends also
listened. He termed Radio Liberation ‘the most effsetive of all Rusalanlanguage broadgaste, "

 

 

 

   

Four recent high iavei defectors from the ranks of the MVD made
statements beaying an the broadcasts of Radio Liberation. == sald
that he had heard Radio Liberation broadcasts * Neleasiy" in Vienna early in

 
 

CULE 3S4ULZ

 

1964, He aleo had evi st othex Russians Untened te the broadsaste.
Yormes M¥D0 ” qucted bn a0 article appeaving in LITR
scaganius wn § Jily 1904 hed this Se says "Tous radia (o » goed heginning.
The Votes of Amevice tp doing a goad job. Practically evary Soviet odftees
hee « radio and abaset ofl of them Usten, “YR

 

   

adie Liberation, with Russian
exiles doing the bysadeasting, had more power und gould bs heard more
anally in Russia, it would be aven better, A radio ihe this, via by Russian
exiles, ts bound te have mors influence iy Rusela than, say, th )
the Volo af Amaries whish speak fox foreign countrioa, "
|__| both bellave that the Soviets ave more afvald of operati¢ne divested to
reach ond influence thety people | thas cperations of puraly lateligence
character, and that propaganda operations should he intensified. Thay
stated that although radio programs ave heing jaromad, the small portion
of ouch progvams that gete through justifies the continuation snd and expansion
eh af such efforts, | \

\
\

Las : 2 en eet, cement e n \

  

and

 

 

 

 

 

The American Committees is supporting and gradually developing the
Inatitute for the Study of the History and Culture of the USSR. Lovated in
Munich, with enull branches tn New York and Paris, the Inetitute sairves
four purposes: (1) to provide an opportunity for amigve echelare from the
Soviet Unien to exgage in. cuntinued study in thety flelds of spealalisation,
(2) to elicit fram the academile forges of the emigration valuable tnfoymatien concerning conditions within the Soviet Union; (3) to provide scholagly
and sound studies for futaye conditions and the means of attaining those
conditions, and (4) to make: important coutrthutlons to the cold-way struggle
againat the Soviet vegizae, The Institute extends a number of research
fellowships te Soviet emigrves in Europe end in the United States, sponsovs
vieoayes coniareness in Munich and tn sia Tork, and publishes the results

ite researc

 

A strict evaluation of the Institute's activities will be condueted during
the first quarter of fleaal 1958 te deterveiine its future course of Aevelopenne’.

 

With the dlesotution of the , Coordinating Center, the Amarican Committee
has withdrawn ite finanetal support of emigre groups and haa abandoned tho
concept of uniting the emigration polltically through Amerigan Committes
initiative. Hf the emigration, on {te own taitiative, achieves political coalos ~
sence and requests American. Committes support, further polley guidance
will . sought from the Department of State and the Operations Coordinating —

oay

 

 
CULGS4UL?S

The American Comsalttes's (msmmediste objectives regarding tha
organtued Soviet conlgeation are spailed ont in ite proposal for Working
Alliangs i aetache calle ha Depavtment of State, January 19, 1954), tn
betel At std — : the inp aatiy yaa soaeeee seaperatian oe | the baals

 
       
 
    

 

b emigre # elit i, sutively, oF sic Sor mn conetly to the
a calter:and a long range objective,

(signed) THOMAS W, BRADEN

THOMAS i BRADEN
Gh ;
International Organizations Divietan

10| |

Orig & 1 - Inspector General (thru C; = [& CLs [& DD/P)
1 ¢c . (oe

lec wl

l ce - cal
l ce ~

 
