 

. ‘ 3 Fo | _
we < Sch rae nny, (( )
| Seen SPECIAL # NDLING a
APPROVED | FOR RELEASE MARCH | , _
yw
2009 |
| ANNEE Hoy on
he
) EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs (Cc) to £22

 

cu1441019 oo afar is¢

REPORT OF THB 169 STUDY

RADIO FREE EUROPE

For security reasons, in the Summary Report on the Effectiveness.
of U. S. International Broadcasting there has been no direct reference
by name to Radio Free Europe (RFE). In fact, however, it is primarily
RFE thet is referred to when the expression: "and other U. S, inter—
national broadcasting" is employed in the section dealing with the
Soviet Orbit. Moreover, the broadcasting activities of RFE were fully
taken into account (though not specifically designated by name in every
case) in the various reports dealing with the dountries b the Iron
Curtain. The general conclusions as to the effectiveness of U. S. inter~
national broadcasting to the Orbit countries embodied in both the Summary ~~
Report and the Coyntry Reporte are, therefore, applicable to our broadcasting effort as a whole, including RFE as well as VOA, RIAS, etc,

EFFECTIVENESS OF RFE >

RFE broadcasts to tha Satellite countries differ from those of VOA
rimarily (a) as the latter speaks as the VOA, while the RFE transmissions
(b) are identified as "Free Polthd," "Free Czechoslovakia," "Free Yungary,"
etc., and speak as the true and Legitdnate voice of these countries.

The tasks assigned to RFE reflect. this fact. These tasks, or policy
objectives, include the following: 
To give the people of the captive countries reason
to hope for liberation; to encourage them to refrain as far
as they prudently can, from collaboration with their Soviet
captors; to prepare them for the task of contributing to
their own liberation; to foster faith that upon liberation
their voluntary establishment of democratic Europe will end
their subjection to tyranny at home and their conscription
in wars fomented by theip Soviet masters; and to weaken and
undermine the authority of their captors by creating dissension and a wholesome fear of eventual retribution.

1 of 3 pages
~SECREE- SPECIAL HANDLING
(28. 2796 i oe P ¥o8 i’. FS
§ : ‘

 

 

eee
CUL441019

SER SPECIAL HANDLING 
qe

The evidence of RFE effectiveness in accomplishing its aims consists
Largely of audience mail (at the present time about 100 letters a month
seach RFE from behind the Iron Curtain), refugee and defector reports,
and the views of Ue S. Diplomatic Missions in the Satellite countries.

This evidence leaves little, if any, room for doubt that, with rew
spect at least to Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Hungary, RFE is effective.
Within the limitations imposed by the special circumstances of the. Orbit
area, and in spite of increasingly heavy Communist jamming, RFE is getting its message through to a very considerable extent, and constitutes
an effective force contributing substantially to the prevention of the
consolidation of Communism in the minds of the people of these satellite
countries.

With regard to Bulgaria and Rumania, very little information or
evidence of any kind is available and what is available relates, for the
most part, to the period prior to 1953. Such evidence as there is, how~
ever, indicates that RFE's audience in Bulgaria and Rumania, although
probably not large numerically, is significant in composition, and that
RFE's programs are, within the limitations imposed by the special cir~
cumstance prevailing in these and sastern-most satellites, effective in
helping to delay the consolidation of communism there.

The evidence available does not provide a direct answer to the
question of whether RFE or VOA is, in general, more effective in broad~
casting to the Soviet Orbit. When all the information and opinions are
summarized and analyzed, the only conclusion on this point which appears
justified is that both are useful and teeinePles and that to eliminate
either would be a serious mistake.

Letters, refugee reports, and Mission opinions, all appear to con- .
firm that both VOA, which speaks with the authority of the United States =
yovernment, » and RFE, which speaks with the voice of Free Hungary to
jungarians, etc,, are essential elements in the effort to sustain the
10pe of ‘Liberation in the hearts of these captive peoples.

The evidence does, however, appear to point to the advisability of
reinforcing, insofar as practical, the respective individualities or
identities of VOA and RFE, At present, the programs of the two contain ges
both similarities and differences, This leads to considerable confusion ( _s
on the part of many listeners. Probably it is not possible - and perhaps |
it is not even desirable - to eliminate this listener confusion completely;

but it does seem that a sharpening of the functional differences between
VOA and RFS would result in substantial gains for each, and, therefore,

2 of 3 pages

 
C0O1441019

! B “

-SRCRET SPECIAL HANDLING:
for U. S. international broadcasting as a whole. The main element in
VOA's popularity with Orbit audiences resides in the fact that, as the
VOA it speaks with the authority of the United States Government behind
it.

The main source of the audience appeal of Radio Free Poland, Radio
Free Hungary, etc., is nationalist - i.e;, each program speaks as an
indigenous voice, combined with the concept of a free European community
which lies behind, or at least is implied in, the name "Committee for
Free Europe." —

The effectiveness of VOA broadcasts to the: gatellite countries, |
therefore, would be increased by reducing its more strident overtones,
and building it up as an authoritative and official voice of the United
States, speaking in a tone which is majostive but not detached, calm,
but positive and strong.

Such a shift of emphasis on the part of VOA would allow RIE to
come more fully into its own as the principal, if not the sole, station
voicing the aspirations of the Satellite people themselves and dealing
with the opposers of Soviet tyranny and corruption and with the Satellite
regimes.

Perhaps the greatest operational problem facing RFE is to maintain
credibility under the peculiar demands of broadcasting in highly specific
terms about life hidden the Iron Curtain. RFE

  
   
 

 

     

     

our Missions within Or o have avoided recently most of the inaccuracies which were noted earlier in its history. This still remains a
problem, however, and some of the interrogation reports tell how gleefully the Communists have seized upon misstatements and mi aidenbiiicatlens
in RFE.

. fhe great advantage of being able to speak with the tongues of free
emigrés has a canplementary disadvantage. Unlike Radio Liberation, RFE
has avoided connection with emigré groups, employing its staff without
particular reference to the groups they represent. Nevertheless, as
liberation canes closer, this choice of personnel will become more important. And even now an important factor in the station's credibility
is the reputation in their native countries of the station's commentators
and newscasters,

In the spring of 1954, RFE appointed an evaluation man, which should
result in making more use of the considerable mail and interrogation
materials which come to the station, and in gathering needed information
concerning the station's audiences and their response.

One further implication of the evidence with regard to RFE broad~casts is that the steadily increasing effectiveness of Communist jamming
calls for all possible measures to overcome this interferences Apart
from technical efforts in this direction, consideration might well be
given to much shorter programs ~ especially news broadcaste and commentary - repeated much more frequently. 3 of 3 pages

ocB-7/23/5h -SkoRne— SPECIAL HANDLING

 

 
eee et ee Rt

CULEeSgGLULY

| BROREE SPECIAL HANDLING
ANNEX
on

RADIO LIBERATION

Radio Liberation is defined by the American Committée for Liberation
from Bolshevism as "an organ. of the anti-Communist struggle of the peoples
of the Soviet Union, and its sole purpose is to help liberate these peoples
from Bolshevism."

The mission of Radio Liberation is admittedly a long-range one,
Its objectives include the fobiow gs,

To make the listener in the Soviet Union and the Soviet
Armed Forces feel that in Radio Liberation he has a voice of
his owns to undermine the strength and expose the propaganda
of the Communist dictatorship in the Soviet Union; to encourage
doubt and disaffection; to discredit Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism
as the ideological basis of the regime; to create in listeners
the determination to overthrow the Communi st dictatorship.

Radio Liberation broadcasts in hussian and other languages used in
the Soviet Union. By the Spring of 1954, it had 7 transmitters on the
air for approximately 20 hours a day each, making a total of approximately
140 tranamitter hours daily. Other transnitters specially designed ta
help overcome janming are expected to go on the air soon.

Jamming of Radio Liberation is extremely heavy, Wherever aeritoriug
tests have been possible, they indicate that the Communists make a priority effort to blot out Radio Liberation broadcasts, The indications
are that the jamming is pretty close to completely effective in Moscow and the other large cities.

Nevertheless, there is some evidence that part at least bof Radio
Liberation's message is getting through. This evidence is slight. It
consicts almost exclusively of a handful of fairly recent escapees or
defectors. Interviews with these escapees establish the fact that Radio
Liberation is known, that it can be heard in some places in Russia despite the jamming; that its programs appear to make a real impression
on the listeners, and that its listening audience includes members of
the Soviet Armed Forces in Germany and Austria,

The number of escapees is so eall that no quantitative conclusions
can be drawn from thelr evidence = although it is perhaps significant
that such a large percentage of this minute sample had heard of or
listened to Radio Liberation while behind the Curtain, But the evidence

—SBORET— SPECIAL HANDLING

ital al
CU1441019

‘Src SPECIAL HaDLING

on Qe

does permit the conclusion that, qualitatively, Radio Liberation is
““effective" in the sense that speaking as the indigenous voice of the
Russian people, it is being heard and listened to within the borders
of the Soviet. Union and by some members of the Soviet Armed Forces
stationed outside the USSR.

Radio Liberation has the combined advantage and disadvantage of
working closely with emigre' groups. On the one hand, this arrangement
gives its broadcasts a particular aythenticity and insight in speaking
to the Soviet Union. On the other hand, the reputation of the station
will necessarily be bound to whatever reputation these groups hold or
come to hold in thsir native lands, As the day of liberation approaches,
the choice of ilicse grovps and giving them a racio voice to speak to the
homeland will pccve to be an ever more important political choice, and
will have to be examined closely,

ocB-7/28/5h | SEC RRE— SPECIAL HANDLING

OLAS:

 

 

 
C01441019

“ am
SEcRa?— SPECIAL HANDLING
ANNEX
on

UNION ‘OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
(USSR)

Radio Liberation is defined by the American Committee for Liberation
from Bolshevism as "an organ of the anti-Communist struggle of the peoples
of the Soviet Union, and its sole purpose is to help liberate these
peoples from Bolshevism,"

The mission of Radio Liberation is admittedly a long-range one. ,
Its objectives include the following:

To make the listener in the Soviet Union and the Soviet
Armed Forces feel that in Radio Liberation he has a voice of
his owns to undermine the strength and expose the propaganda
of the Communist dictatorship in the Soviet Union; to encourage
doubt and disaffection; to discredit Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism
as the ideological basis of the regimes; to create in listeners
the determination to overthrow the Communist dictatorship,

Radio Liberation broadcasts in Russian and other languages used in
the Soviet Union. By the Spring of 195i, it had seven transmitters on
the air for approximately 20 hours a day each, making a total of approx
imately 140 transmitter hours daily. Other transmittérs specially de~
signed vo help overcame jamming are expected to go on the air soon.

Jamming of Radio Liberation is extremely heavy, Wherever monitore
ing tests have been possible, they indicate that the Commmnists make a .
priority effort to blot out Radio Liberation broadcasts. The indications
are that the jamming is pretty close to completely effective in Moscow
and the other large cities.

There is evidence, however, that in spite of jamming Radio Liberation
can be heard in some parts of the Soviet Union and is being listened to by
an audience of completely indeterminate size. Furthermore, there is evidence that this audience includes members of the Soviet Armed Forces staqtioned outside the borders of the USSR,

This evidence consists almost exclusively of interviews with escapees
or defectors who have come out of the Soviet Union or of East Germany (in
the case of members of the Soviet Armed Forcea) since Radio Liberation
‘began to bragdcast in March of 1953. The number of these escapees is
very small: in fact, it consists of a mere trickle. Nevertheless, from
this minute sample there emerges the significant fact that a very large

eieee

-SECRET- , SPECIAL HANDLING
CUL441019

Sreree— ss gpggzxl HANDLING
; ofa

proportion of the few escapees who have come mt and who have been inter~
viewed know about Radio Liberation and have listened to its programs,
Furthermore, these programs seom to have made a good impression on some,
at least, of the escapees interylewed.

The sample is far too small. to permit the drawing of any quanti tative
conclusions. }

In fact, one can probably iy that the significance ¢ of Radio Liberation's broadcasts to the Soviet ‘Union is not quantitative - it is qualitative - and perhaps the same thing applies to VOA. For what it is
worth, the evidence draw from these few escapees indicates that both
Radio Liberation and VOA have an audience, and that each ia appreciated
by those who listen.

This is confirmed by the United States Diplomatic Mission in Moscow
who feel that VOA and Radio Liberation each has its important role to
play, and that these two voices sre not competitive but complementary.
If anything, the Mission appeared to feel that VOA was perhaps the more
important of the two because it spoke with the authority of the United
States Government behind it, whereas, Radio Liberation had the disadvantages as well as the ‘advantages of being the voice of Russian exiles,

On the one hand, this arrangement gives its broadcasts a particular
authenticity and insight in speaking ta the Soviet Union, On the other
hand, the reputation of the station will necessarily be bound to whatever
reputation these groups hold or come to hold in their native lands. As
the day of liberation approaches, the choice of these groups and giving
them a radio voice to speak to the homeland will prove to be an ever
more important political choice, and will have to be examined closely.

To sum up:

The very limited amount of evidence available indicates that

Radio Liberation is heavily janmed but that despite this jamming it is
being heard and listened to within the USSR and by some members of the
‘Soviet Armed Forces outside Russian borders, Insofar as the minute
sample justifies any conclusion, it appears to show that Radio Liberation is effective in the limited sense that it has established itself
as a station which speaks in the name of the Russian peoples themselves,
and that as such it has an audience of indeterminate size among the :
peoples and the Armed Forces of the USSR.

ocB-7/28/5h —SHGRET__ SPECIAL HANDLING
C01441019

ANNEX My
to
HUNGA RY

RADIO FREE EUROPE .

Evidence of RFE's audience and impact in Hungary consists of letters,
of refugee reports, and of opinions gathered from and by members of the

Ue S. diplomatic mission in Budapest. Since it began broadcasting to Hun~
gary, late in 1950, RF has received nearly 1,00 letters, despite strict
postal censorship and other governmental actions inhibiting overt expres~
sions regarding listening to RFE. These letters, therefore, constitute
gignificant evidence that RFE has an audience in Hungary and one which
attaches sufficient importance to RFE's broadcasts to risk writing letters to the station, Most of the letters and the majority of refugees
interviewed tend to confirm that RFE has an audience of significant size,
and that it is looked upon as constituting, in spirit, a true indigenous
voice of the Hungarian people, and that it contributes substantially to
maintaining their hope of liberation and their resistance tn the efforts
-of the regime to consolidate communism in Hungary.

There is also some evidence which appears to credit RFE with strengthening peasant resistance to the regime's agricultural policies.

On the other hand, some of the refugee:,interviews contained vigorous
criticisms of RFE Hungarian programs, and some of the escapees interviewed

voiced a atrong preference for VOA and BBC, while acknowledging that. they .
listened to all three programs.

SRERET- SPECIAL HANDLING

0cB/7/22/sh,

 
/c01441019
.

| | atte aN
|

| . eseREt— SPECIAL HANDLING

- RADIO FREE EUROPE

There is very little evidence available as to the audience or impact of RFE in Bulgaria. Such slight information as can be culled from
the few refugees and other sources is to indicabe that RFE is not so
popular in Bulgaria as are VOA and BBC, but. that even so RFE has an
audience which,though numerically small, is significant in composition;
that its listeners look upon it as a trustworthy and reliable voice;
and that it is helping to maintain the morale of smme persons who are
opposed to the regime by breaking down their. sense of isolation from
the outside world, and by maintaining their hope of eventual libera-~
tion from commmnism.

—~SEORET— SPECIAL HANDLING

TEMA LEO

0cB/7/22/54
-CUL441019
| 7

| oo? » @ Foot

|

“SEeRaP : SPECIAL HANDLING

“CZECHOSLOVAKIA

RADIO FREE EUROPE

On the basis of available evidence, which inoludes large numbers of
refugees and escapee reports, substantial audience mail (taking postal
censorship into account) and the views of members of the U. S,. diplomatic

_ mission in Prague, there appears to be little question that RFE broadcasts to Czechoslovakia have been effective. Up until approximately a
year ago, it seems fairly clear there must have been hundreds of thousands of people listening more or less regularly to RFE programs. The
intensification of jamming in recent months, however, has undoubtedly
reduced that number; but recent evidence confirms that there are still

large numbers who regularly try to bring in an intelligible broadcast
in the face of the communist jamming effort, and who succeed in hearing
and in passing on tn others significant portions of the broadcasts,

The indications are that in Czechoslovakia, RFE is more heavily
jammed than VOA, and far more subject to jamming than BBC. Reports ine
dicate that some listeners are critical of individual programs «n RFE,
and that VOA, and especially BBC, are considered more reliable; but,
the great bulk of the reports confirm that RFE has a large Czech audi-.
ence. The frequency and volume of attacks on RFE in the Czech official
press and radio also constitutes evidence of the important role of RFE
and of its effectiveness in helping tn keep alive the sentiment of ree
sistance to consolidation of the Communist regime. }

“SECREP— | SPECTAL HANDLING ©

ENS aa ig

10B/7/22/5h
 

c01441019
|

 

SPECIAL HANDLING

More than half of the one hundred letters per month which reach
RFE from behind the Iron Curtain come from Poland, In fact, the rela~
tive ease with which these letters to a post office box address get

_ through the postal censorship in Poland has raised the question of

whether some of the letters might not be "plants." Even if this were
the case with some however, enough are plainly genuine to constitute
significant evidence that RFE has. an audience in Poland and that it
is contributing significantly to the task of sowing seeds of doubt

_ about the Communist regime, and sustaining hope of eventual libera
tion.

Other evidence of RFE's impact in Poland comes from refugees
and defectors, and opinions gathered from and by members of the JU. 5S.
diplomatic mission in Warsaw. This svidence combines to indicate that
the audience *ér "Radio Free Poland” is large, despite jamming and other
efforts of the regime to discourage listening; that, despite some criti-~
cism, the programs for the most part are popular and are helpful in maintaining the morale of many Poles and militating against a complete con~
solidation of communism by helping to prevent the complete isolation of
the Polish people from the West.

The available evidence also indicates that, for many of these lis~
teners at least, RFE succeeds in establishing the kind of intimate re~

lationship which makes the audience tend to look upon it as an indigenous station.

SHERET SPECIAL HANDLING

oce/7/22/Sh
'CO1441019

’
e

 

“es : “—N
SEOREE- SPECIAL HANDLING

' RADIO FREE EQROPE

For Rumania, as in the case of Bulgaria, there is very little avail~
able evidence as to the audience and effectiveness of RFE. Moreover, what
information we have is for the most part two years old. or more, and,
therefore, covers a period when RFE broadcasts to Rumania were still new.

Thus, at the time to which most of the available evidence refers,
RFE does not appear to have achieved the same degree of popularity as
VOA and BEC. The total potential radio audience in Rumania is very
small by Western standards, or even by comparison with Poland or Czechoslovakia, and nearly all the sets are centered in the cities - electricity is rare in rural areas ~ where jamming can more easily be made effective. Nevertheless, what little evidence we have would seem to indicate that RFE is contributing, along with VOA, to the task of maintaining
the morale af those listeners wha are opposed to the regime, by breaking
down to some extent their sense of Asnlation from the rest of the world.

SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING

Ep

0cB/7/22/5h

 
