C05459051

A ,

a SOMET  FS

, DEPARTMENT OF STATE
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TOD DECLASSIFICATION |

AND/ORCU RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT:

16-Feb-2010 nn

Jung 16, 1954
_ (BEST COPY AVAILABLE

 

 

THE UNDER SECRETARY

os
tos

 

 

io

gex

3A x

Memorandum for: Mr. Thomas W. Braden ORT

an"

>a

a Subject: RFE's Special Policy Guidance No. 19. 5S
| . zs
| | =

lat
The interested officers in the Department appreciated
having opportunity to review RFE's Special Guidance No. 19.

on "The Turn of the Tide, June-July 1953". This guidance
is regarded on th

e whole as being very good and one which, if
not over-stated, should be effective with the target people.
The guidance

e is, for the most part, the result of excellent analysis,
and effective, imaginative oper

ational planning on the part of the Ko
RFE staff. As of possible interest to the Agency and RFE, in what
is intended not as criticism but constructive and helpful guidance,

there are recorded below comments on a few questionable factual and
substantive items contained in the guidance:

 
 

ISS/IPS, Margaret
£.0.1

elease ( ) Excise (

>

State,

t. O
Exemption (b )

1. While agreeing in general with the theme of the guidance,
the Department believes it would

be over-playing it for RFE to
staid on the proposition that "the tide had turned". The Depart
ment would agree that as compared to 4 year ago, the Communist
regim

es feel more insecure as a result of their basic wealmesses
being openly revealed in June 1953; and that they are "divided by
inner dissensions and are worried lest their plans fail". (para.

hy Pe 13)s It disagrees, however, and believes the target peoples
will disagree and resent RFE's position that "the people feel secure

in their strength " that "they are united in their new-won confidence; "
that "they are in’command of t

he situation"; and that "the workers
and peasants have it in their power to see that the promised con~
cessions are fulfilled". (para. 4, D- 13). Based on available
evidence the foregoing flat statements of fact do not reflect the
actual situation. The Department would coneur that there has been
some change; that the people probably are more conscious than ever
pefore of their potential strength; that they may be more willing
than before to bring more concerted pressure to bear on the regimes}
and that RFB is justified in playing upon these themes so long as it
exercises restraint and caution not to overestate the case. It must
be remembered, as the guidance itself points out in another context,

that the Communist instruments of oppression and punishment are still

intact

 

yu far rast {i [28 |

 

SECRET

S40 |
c05459051

PA
»

ser

» Ow

intact and being used. The people are very much aware of this
fact. The Bast German and Czechoslovakian developments of June
1953 did reveal to the peoples their potential strength and the
basic weakness of the Commumist system. They also revealed the
Soviet ability and will to use force ruthlessly to suppress any
revolt and to penalize severely individuals for acts of opposition
to the regime and its economic policies. |

2. The topic treated in numbered paragraph 4 on page 4,16
one which would warrant a complete policy paper in itself. The
Department is concerned as to the implications contained in this
paragraph. It would not argue as to the validity of the first
sentence or the propriety of FEC including this in a background
disaussion of its guidance to the staff of RFE in Munich. As for
the rest of the paragraph, however, the criticisms of U.S. actions
and suggestions as to what the U.S. should have done in Germany dur=ing and immediately following the East German revolt of June 17
project FEC onto dangerous ground. It is suggested in the guidance,
for instance, that during and after the events of June 17, the U.S.
Army should have moved its troops to the Soviet Zone - West German
borders for maneuvers. In a situation such as existed in East
Berlin and the Soviet Zone on June 17 and several weeks thereafter, you don't unilaterally despatch your troops to a tense borderline
as a political warfare measure, unless you are prepared to commit
them to open hostilities and the commencement of World War III. }
By June 17 the Soviet troops throughout the East Zone were mobilized.
Three mechanized divisions had been moved into East Berlin and taken
up their positions. The security of the Soviet position in East Germany
was in balance. The Soviets were taken just as much by surprise as
the Western Allies by the spontaneous actions of the East Zone workers.
There is not a shread of evidence to indicate that the Soviets would
not have fought and committed their troops to hold their position in
East Germany, if provoked, or if they thought U.S. troops were going
to intervene in support of the Bast German workers. If U.S. troops
simply maneuvered on their side of the line and didn't intervene, what
would have resulted other than more bloodshed and East German Casualties
than actually did transpire? The fact is the United States was not
prepared to risk World War ITI in Berlin in June 1953 in support of
an open East German revolt. Those who believe in the advocacy of
a preventive war can in good conscience suggest that the United States
should have assumed the risks inherent in carrying out U.S. troop
maneuvers on the Soviet Zone borders during the latter half of June
1953. It was not and is not the policy of the United States Government to advocate preventative war. There is a strong hint, undoubtedly
quite unintentional, in paragraph 4 that U.S. policy should embrace
this concept. The Department would regard it as a cause for serious
regret, if the Czechoslovak and other political exiles working for
RFE should so interpret the meaning of the paragraph under reference.

SECRET

The
C05459051

7 genet FH

~ 3
The sentence regarding Otto Nushke, suggesting he should
have been held as a hostage, is Likewise considered regretable.
It is believed FEC would not have included this sentence in its
guidance paper, if it were acquainted with all the facts concerning
the Otto Nuschke incident.

Undoubtedly, there were many aspects of the June 1953 developments in East Germany which could have been more adroitly and advantageously exploited. This has been the subject of intensive study
in the Department and by the OCB, so that this will not be the case
in the event of a repetition of such developments, insofar a8 it is
humanly possible to predetermine strategy and tactics for such an
event in advance and in consonance with U.S. policy objectives. It is
open to question, however, whether it is wise for FEC to inject into a
policy guidance to RFE Munich the criticisms and the suggested courses
of action such as those under discussion. ,

3. At the top of page 3, ina discussion of Kremlin motivations .
for introducing the "New Course" tactic, it is stated tAnother factor
that is still obscure is the influence of the German problem 4a it
stood in the Spring of 1953 when a Berlin conference was clearly in
prospect". :

Comment: As a matter of fact a Berlin conference was definitely
not in prospect until after the revolt of June 17 in East Germany.
The Soviets had been pushing a four-power conference under conditions
unacceptable to the Western Allies, particularly the United States.
It was only after the revolt, which we considered had considerably
weakened the Soviet negotiating position, that the United States believed there might be an advantage to taking the initiative in proposing a four-power conference on Germany and dropping some of our
previously enunciated pre-conditions. While it has been recognized
that the "New Course" concessions announced by the East German communist leaders on June 9 were tailored to bave their effect on the
German unity question, it has been the concensus of opinion that the
more compelling reasons for Moscow's decision to follow such a course
of action were of a more basic internal nature, not the least of which
was the necessity to dtop the large loss of manpower, particularly farmers,
which bad. been steadily mounting during the preceding six month period
in the form of East Germans fleeing to West Berlin.

In the foregoing connection, it is stated on page 9, under the
heading Bast Germany, that "In the first four months of this year
41,443 East Germans entered West Berlin as political refugees. )
Vost must have come from the land, which was already critically short
of farm labor a year ago."
Comment: Weekly

, .
. (I) Prior to the "New Course" of June 1953, the monthly figure was over
40,000.

SECRET

Un
c05459051 L
. SECRET coe 4-94
a | ~4 .

- Gomment: Weekly statistics on the volume and category by
profession and age group of the Hast German refugees are maintained.
As a matter of fact the proportion of farmers within the total flow _
of refugees, dropped drastically following June 1953. Since then
it has consistently been the smallest fraction, the workers having
become the largest single category by profession.

4. The final sentence in the aforementioned paragraph on page 9
gtates: "If the East German regime is arrogantly stupid enough, we
may still see, on June 17th next, a swing back to the revolt of last
year, even without benefit of Free World encouragement."

Comment: The Department is not aware of any evidence indicate
ing that the current policies or actions of the East German regime
are producing a mood among the workers conducive to precipatatingithen
into spontaneous actions of defiance such as in Jume 1953. The workers
are not cooperating with the regime and are still keeping up pressures
for fulfillment of the promised concessions. This takes the form of
slow-downs, absenteeism, non-attendance of political meetings, etc.,
and small acts of sabotage.

5. In numbered paragraph 9 on page 10, in a discussion of the
reasons for the spread of the "New Course" from Soviet Russia to the
satellites it is stated: "There can be no doubt that the spread of
the "New Course" from Soviet Russia to the "satellite" states was hastened
by the demonstrations of the Czechoslovak workers. It was certainly

out of need for the workers! good will - if not actually out of fear
of them - that the East German authorities were permitted by Moscow
to offer unbelievably wide concessions on June 9, one week before
those workers revolted".

Comments: It is strongly doubted whether there was any real
direct connection between the June 9 concessions in Hast Germany
and the demonstrations of the Czechoslovak workers. It should be
remembered that the "New Course! as announced'on June 9 in East
Germany contained concessions to every segment of society except the
workers. In fact a prior imposed 10% norm increase for the workers
wag retained under the "New Course", It was this combination of factors
which sparked the workers! explosion of June 16. It was only after
this event that concessions were made to the workers. The evidence
indicates that, if anything, the Soviets disregarded the clear warnings of the Czechoslovak workers and proceeded in East Germany on the
false assumption that the workers were loyal to the communist regime.

The foregoing comments are not presented for the purpose of suggesting that RFE should not take the line that the Czechoslovak workers'
actions had a beneficial influence on subsequent Soviet policy throughout |

the

SECRET
CQO5459051

~ gegneT 4-34

a» ho

the Satellite area. This is a perfectly legitimate propaganda
line. However, it. is a line which must be put forward more as
& generalization and not supported by an analysis of events in
East Germany which the facts do not support. To do this would
only result in fooling and confusing ourselves and our friends.

6. The final paragraph on page 4 is an over-simplification.
It, in effect, minimizes the features of a Soviet war economy before
the Korean war. It creates the impression that prior to the Korean
war, the Soviet Union and its Satellites were actually concentrating
their efforts on "building of a socialist economy" at the expense of
a military build-up which, of course, was not the case,

7. Under numbered paragraph 6 on page 6 it is stated that
"whereas war preparations are taken with desperate seriousness
by the Soviet rulers..., war preparations are taken merely as a
nuisance by the American people...",.

Comment: The Department cannot agree with this analysis of
the attitude of the American people with regard to war or defense
preparations. The Department believes the vast majority of the
American people reflect a very serious concern and are anxious to
see our defense preparations maintained to whatever extent is
necessary, even though this may entail genuine sacrifice on. their
part. |

8. The Department considers the reasoning in numbered paragraph
1, on page 12 under section "II Guidance", as weak and of questionable
utility, in the light of Indo China ,partioularly the final sentence,
Which the Department believes should be deleted.

9» In numbered paragraph 3, under the Guidance Section on page 13,

it is believed that the communist concessions should be referred to as

promises and real only to the extent they are implemented.
10. In paragraph 5 on page 14, the Department believes it is

important to mention the Kremlin's system of collectivized farms as
one of the contributing reasons why Communism is incapable of ensuring

a satisfactory standard of living. lL)

Deputy Pngeations ral/

SERPET

   

 

 
