re

°C01441018

   

  
 

MEMORANDUM FOR: MB. LAMPON BmRRY

DECLASSIFIED UNDER AUTHORITY OF THE
INTERAGENCY SECURITY CLASSIFICATION APPEALS PANEL,
E.O. 13526,

ISCAP APPEAL NO. 2012-056, document no. 1
DECLASSIFICATION DATE: May 6, 2019

 

 
 

SECTION 5.3(b)(3)

 
 

20 dime 198) Gr)

 
   

ot al ROR, AB
|

DEPABRMEN? OP SYA TR |
SUBJECT ¢ Operation VETO

1. The matter of vevising the contravareial Caoeh thikdance Ne. 13
has now been gompleted In agverdanse with our agrasment. We regret
that this han taken se Long and partiouleriy that the controversy may
have caused you gome embarrasement with other officers in bhe Deparinent,
sinoe you have taken guch an affirmative and frtendis position toward
providing rapid poliey suppert for FVE.G. operations. Ag you Jen
in your jdtier of May l2th, our two offices have bad a eoinpe te Vg
operative: and most successful eulsvnaeMty And I wart te heen at that

WAY »

2. As you know, VETO ig a major operation inrolving many people
hove antl abroad whith makes poliey coniel a canpler matter, Shexkiag
perfeetiy frankly, it shenld be gaid that owr people in New Yerk felt
thas the peldsy agreed te at the meeting in the Lopartnent wha subdeod
to greater flexibility than the foxal dendeion that you passed on to
wa in your. origina] memorandum. ‘they ¢hill do feel that it would ‘be
desirable to take a less rigid position in antiolpation of the Shop Com
fiitea gleotions next antum. Rowerer, they have: caten humble ple add
Wepatdhed the follewing very firm telegram to Muiich whieh was prapered
by my steff with the aseietanea oP aR Huliekt

  

“thf ber raview with appropriate officials Binsy come tee )
pagt of 08 Guidance No.3 radloxiily reviesd to Gheure m, re<
peat ne pessibiiliy of misunderstanding reparding fatars
poldey even though Shop Comibttee olegiiens have bean posh
‘poned antld next autumn, BEE ghould not, repoat nob, during
eby phane of the campaign bell \iteners how %o conduct thelr
'billeting in any wey. Workers who have the opportunity to aleet an important nutber of antiaregime candidates showld be
fede to de so voluntarily and. aportancously, Tf EYE were $b —
Suggest that vorkers elect tengied anti-Communist, inddviduals
selected or elected might lmeadlitely be removed from potential
7 pdsitions by the Coimuniet regime, Ackien by workers wilt

he mush more diffieult for yegige to conbrel if 3% doas aot.
appear to fiow from owteide { RPE) oupgos tions whieh gan provide
geapegoat for subsequent. purges .|

   
'

C01441018 ~ |  georeT

 

WW. BRADEN

isigned] THOMAS

10/‘AMe/ dm
Addressee ~ orig and 1
C/IO = 2
RE - 1 .
I0/ Br 1 - 2 ce
ag pp/Jmpaker

a we, NM nae
as 2
FaaPF ince CE Y x Foo i

| ‘SECRET
