 

: i MORI DocID: 1137555

 

v | (21 April 1954)

AMERICAN COMMITTEE FOR LIBERATION FROM BOLSHEVISM
MISSION AND OBJECTIVES

INTRODUGTION

The following series of guide lines define the mission of the American
Committee and its operating objectives, which will normally remain constant
in a situation short of war. The operating objectives flow from the mission,
and are not satated in order of priority. Under prevailing conditions,
however, propaganda directed to Soviet audiences will receive primary emphasis,
Determination of emphasis and priority as among other objectives will be indicated periodioally through the Comnittee's budgeting processes.

MTSSTON

To conduct overt anti-Soviet activities designed to weaken the prestige
and power of the Soviet dictatorship, primarily within the USSR, and thereby
to reduce its threat to world security, with such cooperation as is obteinable
from moderate elements in the emigration from the USSR who are willing to work
together in this task. To this end, as well as in preparation for possible
crises preceding and following the downfall of the Soviet regime, the latent
and existing forces of the Soviet emigration will be developed and encouraged

' to become constructive, cohesive, and friendly to the United States, rather

than disruptive and divisive.

OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVES

1. By providing moral and material support for emigre-sponsored antiBolshevik activities, to assist the emigration in directing its
_ wUnique capabilities against the Soviet dictatorship.

2. To direct, by radio andother means, propaganda into the USSR which
wills

@. Identify the aims of the emigration with those of the enslaved
Soviet peoples;

OZ yon_2) 0578
APPROVED FOR RELEASE ,
DATE: OCT 2004 om/S FOUR Fe

(39)

re ee
a d ‘ MORI DocID: 1137555

» * : , om
* , : * ’
4. |

be Foster an understanding within the Soviet population of the
true nature of the regime as inimical to the real interests
of the people, and inspire a common spirit of opposition to
it in over-increasing numbers of Soviet citizens;

co. Keep alive the spirit of resistance within the USSR; _

d. Encourage dissensions and strife within the structure of
Soviet power; 
e. Exploit the tensions in the struggles for power within the
Soviet dictatorship;

f. Identify and exploit the contradictions and difficulties
inherent in the Soviet regime and its policies;

ge Induce defections, both psychological and physical;

h. Expose the fundamental inconsistencies, obsolescence, in- |
practicability, and failures of the Marxist, Leninist and
Stalinist ideology underlying the Soviet system and its
practical application;

4. Encourage reliance on traditional indigenous spiritual
concepts 3

j- Stinmlate independent thinking and a spirit of free inquiry;

k. Praesent specific democratic political, economic, and social
processes as an attainable and attractive alternative to the
communist dictatorship;

1. Develop basic concepts of justice and human rights for the
protection of the individual against the power of the State;

me Present realistic and practical alternatives to passive sub-—
mission to the Soviet systen.

3. To utilize to the maximum extent possible the intellectual resources of
the emigration by:

a. Encouraging the preparation by qualified emigre specialists of
both current and long-term critical analyses of the Soviet
regime and its policies, Marxien, leninism and Stalinism, and
the structure of Soviet power;

be Eliciting from the emigration useful information concerning
the Soviet Union and its peoples;

c, Aiding emigre scholars to explore the perspectives of the post~
Soviet period and the means of attaining an orderly transition
from Bolshevism to a democratic order};

 
MORI DocID: 1137555
oO + SeGrRet-*

dad. Assisting emigre scholars from the Soviet Union to
engage in continued activity in their specialized
fields to keep alive in the emigration the intellectual forces being suppressed in-their homeland;

4e To assist the emigration to keep alive within its own ranks the
spirit of resistance to Bolshevism by:

a. Enabling it to stage protests against the Bolshevik
dictatorship and ita representatives;

- pb. Aiding it to win the moral support and understanding
cooperation of the peoples of the non-Soviet ie
in the anti-Bolshevik struggle.

5. To improye the quality of emigre leadership and the effectiveness
of their activities byt

Be ‘Providing means for emigres to gain experience by
. taking responsibility for individual and group work;

be Developing qualities of leadership in promising
individual emigres;

CG. Helping the emigration to understand and utilize those
elements of Western thought and methodology in which
they lack experience,

6. To deprive the Soviet regime of possibilities of exploiting division
| and confusion in the emigration by:

Be Deve loping in the emigration an appreciation of the
priority of common anti-Bolshevik activities over
divisive issues;  § 
be Providing opportunities for ‘diverse elements of the
emigration to work together in order to develop
patterns of harmonious cooperation;

C. Raising the prevailing standards of emigre interrelations to a higher level ef ethical responsibility;

ad. Facilitating contact and communication between the
werious elements of the emigration with a view to
furthering mutual understanding and integration.

7. To accumulate information on, understanding of, and experience with
the emigration, its structure, leadership, capabilities, attitudes,
and aims,

 
