oe —_ =
ood
‘ 1 !

—oo —T
ne
}

 

oe

ihe

toe ae

 

  

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE _|

DATE: 08-Feb-2011 ! a
12 April 1954 ( /0)

EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT: Policy Paper on AMCOMLIB

REFERENCE: DD/P Memo to CIO, dated} April 1954, _
Subject: New Statement i |

 

 

1, Although I understand that Francis Stevens had begun writing
such a policy paper as you mention in reference memorandum, | am
informed by the State Department that it was never completed and
that there is no policy paper now being considered for submission to
N8&C.

2. Inote that this lack of a policy paper should be considered
at the time of our proposed review of the AMCOMLIB situation with
the State Department.

3, AMCOMLIB has now submitted to me a statement of mission
(attached), which Admiral Stevens has been in the process of preparing
| for the last eight weeks. I have serious objections to the mission as
defined by the Admiral in that I think the cart is placed before the
horse. "To weaken and eventually disintegrate the power and influence
of the Soviet dictatorship . . ." is in itself perhaps a large mouthfnl
to swallow, but to do so "through the overt development and application
of those existing and latent democratic forces in the ernigration from
the USER..." seems to me to verge on the ridiculous. I should
think that the statement of mission ought to give priority to the idea
that the purpose of the Committee is to reach the Russian people in
Ruseia by any means possible, including the means of emigration. !
intend to discucs this statement of mission with Messrs. Barbour and
Berry, and their assistants, at the State Department this week and at
that time to press for the above-mentioned policy paper from State.

4. Do you want to take the time to sit in on these talks or shall
Tmerely keep you closely posted?

 

 

   
 

CIO: TWB/eh

Orig “rol DD/P a (signed) THOMAS W. BRADEN

Lec - 10] | THOMAS W. BRADEN

l cc - CIO Chief

lee- ernational Organizations Division
Attachment t

 

AMCOMLIB Statamant of Miaasian

 

 

 
c01434011

AMERICAN OPTS TES POR LIPERATICN “POM BOLSHEVISM

 

The fellowing neries of guide Lines define the xalasion of the American
Comittee and ite operating objectives, which will normally remin constant
ina situation short of war, The operating objectives flew from the aiseion,
and are not stated in order of prierity, nor is there any intention in their
listing to establish emphasis. OCetersination of onphasia and priority as
| anohg objectives will be imiiested pariodieslly through the Comaittes's
iinige ting process.

 

wisai

To weaken and everitually disintegrate the power and influence af the foviet
dictatorship, priserily within the 55H, through the overt development and
| application of those exiating and latent demmeretio foress in the eaigration

| ss Pyom the USOR vhich are willing to work together in practical anti-Joviet
activitics, To this end, as well as in preparetion for crises preceding ani
following the overthrow of the Jeviet regime, the soviet emigration will be
encouraed to bosome a censtruative and cohesive ferou, friendly to the United
States, rather then 6 disruptive and divisive one.

 

le To aesiet the exigvetion te dircet ite umigue anti-comuniat capabilitivs
against the (isk by providing wore) and waterial suport for amigre-sponsored
anti-bolshovik activitica,
2e To direct propaganda inte the JR whieh willl:
a. Identify aims of emigration with those of enslaved Soviet peoples;
be Bring shout a comes understanding of the true sature of the regine as.
inimion] to the real interests of the people, and to inepire ea aomoon
purpose in oprosition to it In over~incrousing numbers off fovist
oitizanes
ee Keep alive the apirit of resistances within the [Bary
d. tneourage dissensions ani atrife within tie structure of Joviut power;

6, kxplodt the tenalons in tie shruvglas for power weabols the “owlet
diotatorahipys

fo Identify ami exploit the contrsdistione amt difMoeulties inherent in
the Joviet regime and its volicices

 
c01434011

36
As

Se
be

Te

 

te Induce defestionn, both paychologiosl and physical;

he Expose the fundamental inconsistencies, obsolescence, impractionbility snd
feilares of Marxiem-Loninian;

i. Eneourage reliance on treditional indigenous apiritual conceptas
je Stimulate independent thinking and a apirit of free taquiry;

Ke Present specific deanaratia processes ca sn attainable and attractive
alternative to the communist dictatorships

1. Develep baste eoncepts of justice and nusan rights for the protection
of the individual ogsinet the power of the State;

Me Fresont reslistic and practical alternatives to pagsive submiasion to
the Soviet syeten,

To acowmlate informtion on, understuniing of, and experience with the
emigration, its structure, leadershi:, capabllities, attitudes, and sims,

Vo deprive the Sovlet regime of possi:ilities of exploiting division snd
confusion in tie enigretion,

To eneournge the onigrution to preduce both current and long-term oritical
analyses of the Soviet regime and its policios, Marxienm-leninisa, and the
etrusture of Soviet power.

To assist emigre scholars from the Joviet Union te engage in continued
activity in thels spectalized Slelda to keep alive in the onigration the
intellectual forees being suppresaed in thair howland.

To elioit from the emigration useful informatios concerning the Soviet “Tnion
and ite peoples.

To provide seholarily and sownd explorations of the psrepeetives of the postSoviet period and tho asans of attaining an orderly and lawful trensition

from Bolshevien te a democratic orier,

 

To develop in the ealgration an appreciation of the priority of cesmen anti~
polehevik activities over all divisive Lasvues,

To rede the prevailing standards of ealgre interrolations to a higher level
of ethical responsibility,

to avelat the enigration to keep alive within ites own ranks the spirit of
registanes to Bolshevias.,

To provide onpertunbties for diverse vlemente of the emigration te work
together in order to develop patterns of harmonious cooperation.

To fneilitate contact ond communiestion between the wirious sleweante of
the emigration with os view to furthering mutual weierstanding amd integration,
(€01434011
a ee

li, To help the enigretion te understend and utilise thoes elomente of western
ways of thought and aethodelogy in whieh they nov lack oxperlence,

15. To develop qualities of lesderaiip in individuel emigres end to provide means
for enigres to guin experience in sasuming reaponaibility for individual and
group work.

16. Te assist the enigration in expreesing ite pretesta againat Yolehevik
despotion ami ite representatives,

17. To assist the onlgration in winning the moral support and understanding
cooperation of the pecplea af the non-Gevist world is the anti-boleahevik
struggle, .

 
