 

C01434010 °7

 

wT =. ; }) [oD oh Gd.
_. EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs oa wee Be M4.

~ £0 13526 3.5(c) 4 [: ¢
RADIO LIMERATI OM FEB 20 100!

A I

A. Baeic Policy Paper

The basic policy paper for Radio Liberation was prepared by
CIA, vith comments by the Bepartment of State incorporsted therein.
This paper, known as the Generel Guidance For Ausrices Redio Advis
Personnel, was isaued by AMCOMLID t
before RADLIB began brosdsasting.

    
 

In brief, the policy paper is not only inadequate but unsuited
for RADLIB's particular needs. Although it speaks of BADLIB as “an
organ of the peoples from the USGR... . who have associated themselves
to assist in the struggle of their fellow countrymen against Soviet
oppression” it ignores the nuances implicit in this concept of the radio,
and denies to it that quality which would set it apart from exiating and
competing media. As it stands, it is a paper by and for Americans. It
disposes limitations on RADLIB similar to those imposed on VOA, and in so
doing leaves to RADLIB only those means of attaining its primary objective, "liberation", that are available to the official voice of the
United States whose purpose is largely to inforn.

In application, the basic policy paper proved restrictive but
not altogether binding. It was not issued as a firw directive except in
those parts which effected the basic interests of the United States and
which directly related to Germany as a host country. Additional policy
guidance | | from AMCOMLIS headquarters was issued on «
continuing, though ad hoc, basie.

 

 

 

B. Basie Guidance Musbers 1 and 2

The firet stroke in giving RADLIB that coloration in the spectrun
of anti-Soviet brosdcasting which is its reason for being, was made on
5 June 1953. On that date Munich issued Basic Guidance No. ). vhich was
the final result of lengthy negotiations between the emigre front and
AMEOMLIB on radio broadcasts to the UOSR. This paper, too, like the basic
policy paper, was a compromise measure, Unlike the basic policy paper,
however, it wes not a compromise among Anericans, but between Americans
and emigres and therefore gave RADIIB some measure of distinctive flavor
vhich set it apart from the likes of VGA, for example.

 

AMCOMLIB headquarters continued to forward to Munich additional
policy and programming guidance, most of it prepared by emigre specialists
and some of it of particularly high caliber. Munich has synthesized thie

material and issued it as Besic Guidance Ho. e thus marking the latest
step in the development of a wnique pers y for RADLIB. .

eee. Ps 71? -3 8st APPROVED FOR RELEASED

 

 

DATE: 08-Feb-2011
au

    

 
C01434010

3

: ry cal

 

 

C. Cancsept of Radio Liberation

It is perhaps fitting at this tine to write a few words in explanation of the concept behind RADLIB. The original ides for RADLIS
evolved from the premise that United States interests in the cold var
could be additionally served by having “Bussians talking to Russians".
Thus the concept for RADLIB envisioned on emigre station vwerking is
the interests of the Soviet pecples and speaking in a voice and from a
point of view recognisable, understandable, and acceptable to the
peoples within the UBgR.

This concept is valid today. RADLIB is not enother official

* tnatrumntality of the United States Government, nor is it the organ

of pfivate American capital, Were it one or the other, the recommendation
here ‘would be to cease all support. VOA does not require a pilot
operation, nor does private capital need a mouthpiece. Indeed, the

best contribution to the cold war effort thet private capital can make

ts capital, not prepsganda in its nam.

' In e6 new and so inexact a science as psychological varfere,
the effectiveness of one or another approach cannot be fully predetermined.
There are too many intangibles. The effectivensss of RADLIB's enigre .
sponscrship, for exemple, can only be adequately estimated by experience
in using that sponsorship. Honetheless, there are enough known end stable
factors invelved to enable the specialist, in prepaganda, in ares, in
media, to indicate fields of likely productivity. @pecialists in propagenda against the Soviet target considered an emigrd: radio, speaking in
the nawe end language of the Boviet peoples, a valuable adjunct to ¥.8.
propaganda efforts. There is no reason at this time to question the
validity of their determination. Indaed, if the value of anti-Soviet
radio has eny relation to Soviet action, then RADLIS 1s becoming increasingly more valuable. Soviet jamutnug of RAQLIB began two ainutes
after it first went on the air, and in the succeeding mouths as many as
12 jammers vere coucentreting on RADLIB brosdcastes simultaneously.
Moreover, several of the most recent defectors to the Vest claim to have
heard RADLIB while in Soviet controlled territory, including the Caucasus.
One of them, an enlisted can with the occupation forces in Germany,
attributes his defection directly to RADLIB. Germens recently returned
to the West have aleo heard BADIIB while behind the Iron Curtein and have
seen evidence of listening on the part of Soviet ocaupation personnel.

D. American Control

, (rities of the concept behind RADLIB have expressed continued
alarv’ over our ability te maintain contre] of the radio. It can be unequivocally stated that Aserican control over every aspect of RADLIB'«
operation always prevailed and vas never in serious jecpardy. Isitially,
when a Coordinating Center of the emigration existed, the emigration ves
sllowed a significant voice in running RABLIB. This voice was often obatructive, but never deciding.

 
C01434010

 

With the dissolution of the Coordinating Center, the operation
of RADLID ves almost totally divorced from enigre politics. Indeed,
the major concern became not the extent of emigre participation in radio
affairs, but rather the lack of adequate sponsorship for RADLIB
broadcasts,

AMEZOMLIB's nev approach to the problem of a united front, a
Working Alliance of the exigration, shifts emphasie from political
unification and activity, to joint practical vork, and allows the emigration only an advisory voice in RADLIB as in all other anti-Soviet
efforts to be subsidized ny AMCOMLIB.

The participation of the Soviet emigration in Committee
activities including RADLIB is essential to the effectiveness of the

 

control there is a direct ratio betveen the effectiveness of RADLIB and

the degree of emigre participation in it. It ia only with the active
support of competent emigres that RADLIB can attain that quality which
is its purpose.

E. Bifference Between RADLIB and VOA
It is the desire here to emphasize that RADLIBD can, should, and
does serve a function distinct from that of YOA and of a nature wider
than that prescribed in the Jackson Committee Report.

The basic and significant difference between VOA and RADLIB is in)

their sponsorship. Emigre sponsorship of RADLIB obligates it to speak in

‘program as it is conceived, Within the limits of final American
a voice and froma point of view peculiar to the Soviet emigration and | |
hence, presumably, most readily acceptable to the peoples of the US&R. |

Thet is not to say, howeve, that RADLIB must be restricted to |
those programming and broadcasting practices which are not already re- _
served to VOA or to some other medium. Because it ig deemed fitting for :
YOA to “concentrate on a more conservative and essentially long-term
approach} an approach fundamentally informative in make-up and devoid of
special, pleading", it is not obligatory for RADLIB to “concentrate on
rough and tuath, direct, tactical propaganda warfare’,

The measure of what RADLIB can say, how it can say it, and to
what purpose, is not to be exclusively determined by policy considerations
governing VGA. It does not follow that BRADLIB can say only what VOA can
not say or that it eannot say what VOQA can.

- RADLIB‘'s role in the U.S. propaganda effort is not merely a
supplementsry ane. Its mission is not solely to complipant VOA. Indeed,
both media are, to a large extent, subject to similar rules of behavior.
Like YOA, RADLIB must hev to the policy line of the Government! it must
adhere to established principles of psychological werfare} it avst remain
true to the spirit of its sponsorship.

 
 

CO1434010
]

SECRET

/

It is here, in remaining true te its sponsorship, that RADLIB
and VOA drew apart. Although BADLIB‘'s sponsorship gives it wider
latitude than thet allowed VOA, it does not confer carte blanche to
say anything and every thing that people vant it to say. There ere
lines and themes prohibited to RADLIB either because they are contrary
to the interests of the U.8. or because their use vould quickly canpromise the integrity of the radio as the voice of a free Soviet emigration. Similarly, the fact that RADLIB has e non-governmental
character ani a privete sponsorship does nt constitute a saésdate to be
rough end tumble, direct and tactical in approach. There dre deter~
mining factors other than sponsorship, the appeal to be wade, the
audience to be addressed, for example, which may™ dictate formality and
conservatism for saximim effectiveness.

Patlure to appreciate the obligations imposed on RADLIB. by its
sponsorship has been responsible for considerable minunderstanding among
officials in governmental circles regarding the value of RADLIB to our
psychological werfare effort. Because in en endeavor to preserve ite
integrity as the voice of a free and s united emigration, RADLIB has refused to accept certain tactical themes peculiarly American, Asericans
have questioned ita merit and have recommended its reorganization if not
its dissolution.

RADLIB is a non-governmental, privately sponsored organ,
designed to further the interests of the United States, both fomediate
and long range, vis a vis the Soviet Union. Paradoxically, its ebility
to further American interests depends largely on its ability to speak
in a voice and from a point of view alien to most Americans. Any attempt
to "Americanize” RADLIB is tantazount to sabotaging a very useful tool
in the anti-Soviet struggle. )

TT. PROGRES

A. BEvalvation

When Radio Liberation first went on the air, 1 March 1953, there
were considerable misgivings concerning the quality of its programs and
the ability of ite programming staff to keep it droadcasting uninterruptedly.

Admittedly, program content was veek, ye bad. |  s-_§- AMCOMLIB)
‘coneerned with the quality of broadcasts, made special] ¢ efforts to
monitor and evaluate all programs which were transmitted. Of necessity

‘evaluations were made ex post facto, after the programs vere on
the air. Konatheless, | __ | a

spot check of Nationality programs _ ee |
| revealed a steady improvement in —

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

If we can apply single vords to sum up RABLIB efforta, its oreadcasts in March rated no better than “poer". By July of 1953 RADLIB reached

 

 
 

CQ1434010 °°"

;

an over-all rating just short of “good”. Many of its programe were
still “poor”, but there was enough "excellent", and occasionally even
“brilliant”, material to raise the average.

 

i

| ; a _ @MSOMLTB, New York, however, has
hired several well qualified people, scme of them on a fee basis, to
conduct program evaluations. The sum total of their oritique vas that
RADLIB, although as good or better than other media talking to "Russians
in Russian", ia falling short of its potential. Its programs, they say,
still lack a central purpese and cohesiveness; it has not as yet
developed ea distinctive and an individual personality.

3B. Recent improvesents

Since then, in the last two to three months, AMUOQMLIS has taken
firm steps to strengthen RADLIB's programming. ‘he greatest progress
hes been mage with the Mationality programs. Nev people, many of then
skilled veterans released by YOA Because of prograsp cutbacks, vere carefully screened and the best of them employed. Ukrainian and Byelorussian
staffs are being selected with particular emphasis on professional compe~
tence, and broadcasts in these langthages should be on the air waves in
Merch or April. Today, the quality of most of the Nationality broedcasts
of RADLIB sre generally considered superior to the Russian language
‘program.

 

 

 

The current difficulty vith the Russian desk is the lack of «6
competent desk chief and a general shortage of competent fulltise writers.
Politics are not involved. There are several candidates for the desk
chief slot now ander consideration, and it appears likely that a qualified
emigre will be on board in the near future.

[ !

So. 2.

 

 

 

| | Undoubtedly it marks a noteworthy accomplishment,
although it falls short of giving RABLIB the character and flever that is
required. :

 

 

Periodically, a suggestion is made to create for RADLIB a special
advisory programming council of recent emigres vhich vould develop progres
lines and themes for the purpose of exploiting these conditions and vulnerebilities in the US@R which ere both of essence and of moment. his
Council will probably be established before the end of this fiscal year.
It should appreciably add to RADLIB's reputation ag an suthoritative and
a unique voice in the anti-Boviet struggle.

 
 

conasagzs ss

{

TIX. TECRBICAL

A. Equipment and Frequencies

At this vriting RADLIB is broadcasting vith the power of four
10 kw transmitters, with six antennae, located et Lampertheia, Germany.
An additional three 10 kw transmitters with two antennae, all bought
and paid for, will be in operation about 15 March 1954.

 

Yor this equipment RADLIB has seven short-wave frequencies
assigned on a 24-hour basis, four on a half-day basis, and one for
trial purposes. The seriousness of RADLIB‘'s frequency bind has in part
been alleviated by the State Department's permission to use Soviet
frequencies. |

B. Languages

RADLIB is broadcasting to the following areas in the appropriate
languages:

1. Russian Language

a. East Germany, Poland, Austria
b. Western RFSR, Byelorussia, and Ukraine
ec. Caucasus

2. Minority Languaget

a. North Caucasus, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaidjas

»o. TPatar-Baahkir ASER

c. Turkmenistan, Kazekhatan, Kirghitia, Uzbekistan,
Tadzhikistan

Cc. Jamming and Monitoring

Tvo minutes after Radio Liberation vent on the air, on 1 March
1953, Soviet jaumers began their attacks. Monitors have identified as
many as 34 different jammers which have hit RADLIB in the course of a
year. Concentrations of 10 to 12 jammers have been known to focus on the
redio simultaneously. According to RADLIB's chief engineer, Soviet
jammers give a higher priority to RADLIB than to BFE.

Monitoring reports made on a continuing basis by RADLIB monitors
in Berlin and in Vienna indicate the ability of the radio to lay down a
gocd signal in East Germany and in Austria during the major share of the
broadcasting day, Ad hoc monitoring of the radio in Ankara, Brzerum, and
Meshed give reasonable assurance that its signal is heard in the Caucasus
and in parts of Central Asia. |

 
C01434010
| 6

 

 

Additional reports of RADLIB's ability to reach specific
targets come from recent defectors. Several claim to have heard the
radio while on occupation duty in East Germany. A defector currently
in the Middle East reports hearing RADLIB in Georgia.

POLITICAL PROGRAM - AMCOMLIB
I. PRESENT PROGRAM

AMCOMLIB's immediate objectives regarding the organized Soviet
emigration is spelled out in its proposal for a Working Alliance (approved
by the Department of State, January 19, 1954). In brief, it sidetracks
political unity and proposes cooperation on the basis of practical vork.
Wore importantly, it drops emigre participation in AMCOMLIB activities
from the level of equal partnership to an advisory function.

This new plan for the emigration will be leunched during March of
this year. Expert opinion an its ability to succeed is divided. It is
estimated, however, that the proposal for a working alliance has enough
fissionable material to break up the tvo major polarizationa in the
emigration and to rally key groups from their ranks behind AMCOMLIB's
prograz. Should the effort fail, AMCOMLIB vill either have to scrap the
political effort entirely, or relegate it to the role of a minor and a
long range objective. In either case, AMCOMLIB will be faced with the

 

immediate need of creating[ | emigre sponsors for its antiSoviet work.

 

 
