Note by the Executive Secretary

to the

National Security Council

on

United States Policy toward the Soviet
Satellites in Eastern Europe

References:

A. NSC 58/2

B. NSC 158

C. NSC 162/2

D. NSC 143/2

E. NIE-87 and NIE-90

The enclosed draft statement of policy on the subject, prepared by the NSC Planning Board in the
light of NSC 162/2, is transmitted herewith for consideration by the National Security Council at its
meeting on Monday, December 21, 1953.

Also enclosed is an NSC staff study for Council information in this connection. The enclosed policy
does not appear to involve any unusual expenditures over or beyond funds which have been
appropriated for normal operating programs of the agencies involved. Accordingly, no financial
appendix is enclosed.

The enclosed statement of policy is intended, if adopted, to supersede NSC 58/2 and NSC 158.

It is recommended that, if the Council adopts the enclosed statement of policy, it be submitted to
the President with the recommendation that he approve it; direct its implementation by all
appropriate executive departments and agencies of the U.S. Government; and designate the
Operations Coordinating Board as the coordinating agency.

James S. Lay, Jr.
Executive Secretary

cc: The Secretary of the Treasury

The Director, Bureau of the Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence

[Page Break in Original]

United States Policy toward the Soviet
Satellites in Eastern Europe

[..]
DRAFT

Statement of Policy

Proposed by the

National Security Council

on

United States Policy toward the

Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe

(Except as otherwise indicated, parenthetical
references are to paragraphs in the Staff Study)
General Considerations

1. Soviet Control over the Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe (Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Romania, Bulgaria, Albania and East Germany ) has contributed importantly to the power
disequilibrium in Europe and to the threat to the security of the United States. Despite economic
dislocation and administrative difficulties, the Kremlin has made considerable progress in exploiting
the industrial capacity of the satellites and expanding their military capabilities for use as a
coordinated whole with those of the Soviet Union. (2-4, 37)

2. Barriers to the consolidation of the Soviet Union are:

a. The anticommunist attitude of the great majority of the population in each satellite. This
anticommunism is intensified particularly by loss of personal freedom and a reduced standard of
living, as well as by outraged religious and national feelings, but its undiminished survival over the
long run Is jeopardized by communist control over every aspect of the lives of the people,
particularly the young.

b. The continued refusal of the West to accept the permanence of the imposed satellite regimes as
compatible with the freedom and self-determination of nations. (5-6)

3. Despite the widespread popular opposition to communism in each of the satellites, Known
underground groups capable of armed resistance have survived only as scattered remnants in a
few areas, and are now generally inactive. The recent uprisings in East Germany and the unrest in
other European satellites evidence: (a) the failure of the Soviets fully to subjugate these peoples or
to destroy their desire for freedom; (b) the dependence of these satellite governments on nearby
Soviet armed forces; and (c) the relative unreliability of satellite armed forces (especially if popular
resistance in the satellites should increase). These events necessarily have placed internal and
psychological strains upon the Soviet leadership. Nevertheless, the ability of the USSR to exercise
effective control over, and to exploit the resources of, the European satellites has not been
appreciably reduced, and is not likely to be, so long as the USSR maintains adequate military
forces in the area. (3)

4. The death of Stalin created for Soviet dominion over the satellites new problems which may lend
themselves to exploitation. Although there is as yet no evidence that Soviet capability to dominate
the satellites has been impaired since the death of Stalin, the possibility nevertheless exists that a
greater concentration of effort may be required to maintain control and that the new Soviet leaders
may have to moderate the pace and scope of their programs in the satellites. Such moderation is
indicated by the new economic measures, recently announced by the satellite regimes. (7)

5. Although nationalist opposition to Soviet domination is a disruptive force within the Soviet orbit,
and even within the communist movement itself, it does not appear likely that a non-Soviet regime
on the Tito model will emerge in any of the satellites under existing circumstances. The
combination of basic factors which made possible the successful Yugoslav defection from Moscow
is lacking in any of the satellites. In addition the Kremlin has taken drastic measures since the
Yugoslav defection to guard against further defections. (6, 8-17)

6. Tito's establishment of an independent communist regime, nevertheless, has brought valuable
assets to the free world in the struggle against aggressive Soviet power. It provides a standing
example of successful defiance of the Kremlin and is proof that there is a practical alternative for
nationalist communist leaders to submission to Soviet control. There are further advantages flowing
from Yugoslavia's political and military cooperation with the West, its association with Greece and
Turkey in a Balkan entente, and its role as a vigorous propaganda weapon against Soviet
Communism. (18-21)

7. East Germany poses special and more difficult problems of control for the USSR than do the
other satellites. The fact that the main body of the German nation in the Federal Republic has
made continued advances in freedom and economic well-being, and the fact that West Berlin
provides a means of contact with the free world, serve to keep alive the hope for an eventual
escape from Soviet domination. By utilizing these special advantages the West can probably
continue to exploit strong popular anti-communism, maintain East Germany as a focal point and
example of disaffection for the rest of the Soviet satellites, make difficult full utilization of East
Germany's economic resources, and keep alive Soviet doubts as to the reliability of the East
German population in time of war. At the same time, U.S. policy toward East Germany must take
into account the latter's relationship to the problem of German unification, the integration of the
Federal Republic with Western Europe, and the importance of, and dangers inherent in, preserving
our access to and position in Berlin. (24, 41, Annex B)

8. The detachment of any major European satellite from the Soviet bloc does not now appear
feasible except by Soviet acquiescence or by war. Such a detachment would not decisively affect
the Soviet military capability either in delivery of weapons of mass destruction or in conventional
forces, but would be a considerable blow to Soviet prestige and would impair in some degree
Soviet conventional military capabilities in Europe. (NSC 162/1, para. 5-b)

Policy Conclusions

9. It is in the national security interests of the United States to pursue a policy of determined
resistance to dominant Soviet influence over the satellites in Eastern Europe and to seek the
eventual elimination of that influence. Accordingly, feasible political, economic, propaganda and
covert measures are required to create and exploit troublesome problems for the USSR,
complicate control in the satellites, and retard the growth of the military and economic potential of
the Soviet bloc. Decisions on such measures to impose pressures on the Soviet bloc should take
into account the desirability of creating conditions which will induce the Soviet leadership to be
more receptive to acceptable negotiated settlements. Accordingly, this policy should be carried out
by flexible courses of action in the light of current estimates of the Soviet Government's reactions
and of the situation in the satellite states concerned, after calculation of the advantages and
disadvantages to the general position of the United States in relation to the USSR and to the free
world. (37-42)

Basic Objectives

10. Long-range: The eventual fulfillment of the rights of the peoples in the Soviet satellites to enjoy
governments of their own choosing, free of Soviet domination and participating as peaceful
members in the free world community. (2, 37)

11. Current:

a. To disrupt the Soviet-satellite relationship, minimize satellite contributions to Soviet power, and
deter aggressive world policies on the part of the USSR by diverting Soviet attention and energies

to problems and difficulties within the Soviet bloc. (35, 39)

b. To undermine the Satellite regimes and promote conditions favorable to the eventual liberation
of the satellite peoples. (35, 36, 38, 39)

c. To conserve and strengthen the assets within the satellites, and among their nationals outside,
which may contribute to U. S. interests in peace or war, and to the ultimate freedom of the

satellites. (29-32, 39)

d. To lay the groundwork, as feasible with reasonable risk, for resistance to the Soviets in the event
of war. (29-30, 35)

Courses of Action
12. Use appropriate means short of military force to oppose, and to contribute to the eventual
elimination of, Soviet domination over the satellites; including, when appropriate, concert with
NATO or other friendly powers, resort to UN procedures, and, if possible, negotiation with the
USSR. (23-32, 36)

13. Encourage and assist the satellite peoples in resistance to their Soviet-dominated regimes,
maintaining their hopes of eventual freedom from Soviet domination, while avoiding:

a. Incitement to premature revolt.
b. Commitments on the nature and timing of any U. S. action to bring about liberation.

c. Incitement to action when the probable reprisals or other results would yield a net loss in terms
of U. S. objectives. (26, 29, 30, 40)

14. Develop and encourage, as appropriate, increased use of passive resistance by the peoples of
the satellites. (5, 40)

15. Be prepared to exploit any future disturbances similar to the East German riots of 1953 by
planning courses of action which would best serve U.S. interests in such events. (29, 30)

16. Foster satellite nationalism as a force against Soviet imperialism, while avoiding commitments
to national ambitions which would interfere with U.S. post-liberation objectives. (6, 16)

17. Cooperate with other forces--such as religious, cultural, social--which are natural allies in the
struggle against Soviet imperialism. (5)

18. Stimulate and exploit conflicts within the communist ruling groups in each satellite, among such
groups, and between them and the Kremlin. (16)

19. Foster disaffection in satellite armed forces and police, to diminish their reliability in suppressing
domestic disturbances and their will to fight in the event of war. (3)

20. Encourage democratic, anti-communist elements in the satellites; but at the same time be
prepared to exploit any Titoist tendencies, and to assist "national communist" movements under
favorable conditions, making clear, as appropriate, that opportunities for survival exist outside the
Soviet bloc. (8-16, 41)

21. Exploit the developing organizations of Western unity (NATO, OEEC, CSC, etc.) as a force of
attraction for the satellites. (22)

22. Encourage defection of key satellite personnel and possible VFC recruits, but not mass
defection; and assist in the resettlement and rehabilitation of refugees who do escape. (32)

23. Support or make use of refugees or exile organizations which can contribute to the attainment
of U.S. objectives, but do not recognize governments-in-exile. (32)

24. Strengthen covert activities in support of the objectives in paras. 10 and 11 above. (29-32)

25. Maintain flexibility in U.S. economic policies toward the Soviet bloc, and toward individual
satellites, in order to gain maximum advantage with the limited economic weapons at hand (both
restrictions and incentives). (27, 28)

26. Continue U.S. diplomatic missions in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Rumania as long
as may be in the U. S. interest, and keep under review the possibility of resuming diplomatic
relations with Bulgaria. (25)
27. Exploit the existence, and encourage the development, of the Yugoslav-Greek-Turkish entente
as a means of weakening Soviet power in the Balkan satellites and as an example of free
association of independent Balkan nations serving as a potential alternative to Soviet rule. (22)

28. Keep the situation with respect to Albania under continuing surveillance with a view to the
possibility of detachment of that country from the Soviet bloc at such time as its detachment might
be judged to serve the over-all U. S. interest. (15, 31, Annex B)

29. Exploit, to the fullest extent compatible with the policies regarding Germany as a whole and
Berlin, the special opportunities offered by West Berlin and the facilities of the Federal Republic to
undermine Soviet power in East Germany. Place the Soviets in East Germany on the defensive by
such measures as may be taken to keep alive the hope of German reunification. (24, 41)

30. Emphasize (a) the right of the peoples of Eastern Europe to independent governments of their
own choosing and (b) the violation of international agreements by the Soviet and satellite
Governments, whereby they have been deprived of that right, particularly the Yalta Declaration on
Liberated Europe and the Treaties of Peace with Bulgaria, Hungary and Rumania. (2, 37)

NSC Staff Study

on

United States Policy toward the Soviet
Satellites in Eastern Europe

Problem

1. To determine what policies with respect to the Soviet satellites of Eastern Europe (Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Albania, and East Germany ) will best serve the
national interests of the United States, and in particular will contribute to the resistance to and
eventual elimination of dominant Soviet influence over those satellites. It is necessary to reexamine
and revise, where necessary and desirable in the light of intervening developments, the
conclusions of NSC 58/2.

Background
Importance of the Satellites

2. The satellites are of importance in the current balance of power in Europe because they
augment the political, military and economic power of the Soviet Union and extend Soviet power
into the heart of Europe. The permanent consolidation of Soviet control in this area would

represent a serious threat to the security of the United States and Western Europe. It is likewise our
traditional policy to recognize and support the right of such peoples to independence and to
governments of their own choosing. The elimination of dominant Soviet influence over the satellites
is therefore, in the fundamental interest of the United States.

Soviet Domination of the Satellites

3. Soviet domination of the satellites remains a basic fact; there is no evidence as yet to indicate
that Soviet capability to dominate the satellites has been significantly affected by anything that has
happened since the death of Stalin. However, Soviet suppression of the riots in East Germany
suggests that the satellite regimes themselves may be unable, without Soviet armed forces
available, to maintain the population in subjection to the will of the Kremlin.

4. The Kremlin has pushed forward with considerable success its plans to expand the industrial,
and military capabilities of the satellites and to coordinate their Sovietized political system, military
establishments and economies with those of the USSR in a working totality. Although the Kremlin
permits and encourages programs of cultural, economic and technica collaboration among the
satellites, it appears determined to bind the satellites individually to the USSR rather than to unify
them. Whether and when the Soviet leaders will take the formal step of incorporating any or all of
the satellites into the USSR itself is unpredictable.

Opposition to Soviet Domination

5. The great majority of the population in each satellite continues to be opposed to the communist
regime and resents the lack of personal freedom and hard living conditions for which the regime is
responsible. The aggrieved religious feelings resulting from the communist attack on religion have
also served to intensify this widespread anti-Communism. The anticommunist majorities are not in
a position to carry on active resistance which would represent a serious challenge to Soviet power
in any of these satellites with the possible exception of Albania, as is noted hereafter. Nevertheless,
by passive resistance they can impede the process of Sovietization and afford a main element on
which must be based eventual elimination of dominant Soviet influence. It is recognized at the
same time that, if the process of exclusive communist indoctrination and education proceeds
without interruption for an indeterminate period, it is uncertain how strong this anticommunist
sentiment may remain.

6. In addition to anticommunism per se, nationalism is a significant factor of opposition to Soviet
control in all the satellites. These peoples will not reconcile themselves in a few years to the loss of
national independence, a disregard of national traditions and the enforced glorification of the
USSR. The nationalist sentiment focuses on the memory of better times in the past, hopes for the
future, and the resentment felt at the injuries and insults experienced under the present regime. In
many respects it is the strongest leverage available for strengthening the morale of the satellite
populations, sustaining their spirit of resistance to Soviet imperialism, and encouraging their
defiance of servile communist regimes. Nationalism is, however, a double-edged weapon, raising a
number of operational problems, as we have discovered in our propaganda work and dealings with
the refugees. Besides arousing anti-Soviet feeling, nationalist sentiment also creates divisions
among these peoples themselves, Magyars against Slavs and Rumanians, Slovaks against
Czechs, Poles against Germans and Germans against the Slavs. A problem which will become
increasingly serious as nationalist sentiment ferments is that of the Polish occupied areas of
Germany east of the Oder-Neisse line.

7. The death of Stalin created for Soviet dominion over the Satellites new problems which may lend
themselves to exploitation. Although there is as yet no evidence that Soviet capability to dominate
the Satellites has been impaired since the death of Stalin, the possibility nevertheless exists that a
greater concentration of effort may be required to maintain control and that the new Soviet leaders
may have to moderate the pace and scope of their programs in the Satellites. Such moderation is
indicated by the new economic measures recently announced by the Satellite regimes, which give
priority to increasing the output of consumer goods in order to improve popular morale and to
stimulate labor productivity. In promulgating the new policy, the Satellite regimes have admitted
that an economic dislocation has developed, mainly because of an over-emphasis on the
development of heavy industry and a neglect of agricultural development. The Satellite regimes
now seek a modification of industrial and agricultural programs to bring about a more normal
balance between industry and agriculture and to raise the level of popular morale. The Communists
have rationalized that this corrective will provide a healthier foundation for future economic growth
and for further sovietization of the Satellite countries.

Possibilities of “Titoism”

8. NSC 58/2 laid down a policy of fostering communist heresy among the satellites and
encouraging the emergence of non-Stalinist regimes as temporary administrations even though
communist in nature. However, as was noted in the third Progress Report on implementation of
NSC 58/2, dated May 22, 1951, the Kremlin and its local agents have been successful in warding
off any trend in the satellites comparable to that which led to the break between Moscow and
Yugoslavia. In fact, in none of the satellites have there developed the capabilities such as rendered
Tito's defection successful.

9. Of all the European satellite leaders, only Tito achieved controlling power. He created an
impressive military force, as well as a political organization, responsive to his own leadership which
maintained itself inside Yugoslavia during the war and which, following withdrawal of the Nazi
forces, possessed requisite power to impose its will upon the Yugoslav people without substantial
assistance from the Red Army. All the other Communist regimes, with the exception of Hoxha's
government in Albania, were placed in power by the Red Army itself or by threat of force which the
Red Army represented. These regimes, therefore, were from the outset dependent on Soviet
military power for their very existence and have remained so. In East Germany, Poland, Hungary
and Romania, the physical presence of sizeable Soviet forces bears daily witness to Soviet
domination of these satellites. In Poland the Minister of Defense is a Soviet marshal, and Soviet
officers occupy the higher posts throughout the Polish armed forces. In all the satellites there are
large Soviet military missions which are supervising the reorganization of the satellite armed
forces, and Soviet commanders, advisers, and technicians are located in key command and staff
positions in the military forces and in the defense ministries.

10. Thus, the ultimate basis of Soviet control in the satellites is Soviet military domination of these
countries. The Soviet forces stationed within the satellites and in the Soviet Zone of Austria in April
1953 consisted of 538,000 personnel from the Soviet Army (including military missions), 24,000
security troops, and 2,400 Soviet-manned aircraft.

11. Of all the satellite leaders of Eastern Europe, only Tito could claim to exercise effective control
over the state security apparatus. His security forces were built up on the basis of personal loyalty
demonstrated in the heat of battle, and Tito knew that he could trust the overwhelming majority of
the higher echelons of his command. None of the current satellite leaders can count on this kind of
allegiance from the key personnel of their security establishments. Soviet liaison personnel
maintain close supervision over the leading satellite officials, and it is doubtful whether far-reaching
orders issued by those leaders to any of their respective security organs would be executed without
confirmation from Soviet controlled sources. In contrast, it was Tito's steadfast denial to Soviet
liaison officials of uncontrolled access to his security organization which contributed extensively to
the friction climaxed by the break between Tito and the Kremlin.

12. Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Rumania have a common land frontier with the USSR.
Bulgaria has a common sea frontier. These states are accordingly more exposed to Soviet military
intervention and hence more readily susceptible to Soviet pressure and control than was
Yugoslavia which shares no common frontier with the USSR. Furthermore, with Yugoslavia's long
sea coast facing the West, greater possibilities to obtain material support from the Western powers
in the event of a break with Moscow were available to Tito than there would be to the other
satellites, with the exception of Albania.

13. Since Tito's defection in 1948, the Soviets have taken stringent and thorough measures to
guard against a similar development in other satellites. Leaders in whom any taint of Titoism was
suspected have either been shorn of all power, imprisoned, or actually liquidated. If any leader
through long tenure in office or for any other reason seemed to be gaining too much power, he has
been ruthlessly eliminated. The customary security safeguards have been tightened and expanded.
A series of friendship and mutual assistance pacts have been concluded among the various
satellites (except Aloania and East Germany) and with the USSR which in effect obligate the
parties signatory to go to each others' aid in the event of action from without. The relationship of the
USSR to the satellite regimes raises every probability that the Soviets would in effect intervene in
the face of internal action threatening the overthrow of the Soviet-controlled regimes, except
possibly in the case of Albania.

14. In the light of the foregoing considerations, the chances are negligible at the present time that
any existing satellite communist regime would or could break away from Moscow under its own
power, or, with the possible exception of Albania, that any anti-Soviet faction could seize or hold
power in a satellite and bring about its detachment from the Soviet bloc.

15. Albania is to some extent an exception in that, unlike the other satellites, it does enjoy
geographical isolation from the rest of the Soviet bloc and access to the West by sea. Although the
other factors which rendered Tito's defection successful are generally not present, Soviet control in
Albania is challenged by the inherent potential of the internal anti-Communist majority whose
resistance could be supported by the large Albanian population in the neighboring Kossovar [sic]
region of Yugoslavia. The necessity of Western cooperation with Yugoslavia would of course be a
complicating factor. Albanian refugees in the West might also be used although their disunity would
seriously hamper any such action.

16. Nationalism may, nevertheless, continue to be a disruptive force within the Communist
movement open to exploitation by the United States. Not all communists in the satellites are able or
willing to serve Moscow's interest without any regard for that of their own nation; the very problems
of governing their respective territories and of meeting the goals which have been set seem to
require at least a minimum of cooperation from the people and may lead certain local communists
to oppose as best they can those Kremlin demands and policies which put too great a strain upon
their own position. In any of the satellite communist parties there are likely to be personal
antagonisms and other differences which might be exploited from the outside.

17. Since the relation of Communist China to the USSR is believed to involve considerably less
subordination than that of the European satellites, the diplomatic, trade and cultural connections
between the satellites and Communist China represent a potentially troublesome factor in Sovietsatellite relations. While this factor is not easily susceptible to exploitation by the U. S., it should be
closely watched for whatever opportunities it may offer.

Significance of Yugoslavia in Policy Toward the Satellites

18. Even though no other Satellite has followed or seems capable (with the possible exception of
Albania) of following the path of Tito's Yugoslavia under existing conditions, the example of
Yugoslavia continues to be a significant factor in the satellite picture. Tito's success in maintaining
Yugoslavia's independence constitutes a standing insult to Soviet prestige and a challenge to
Soviet infallibility. His political and ideological counteroffensive has been a disturbing factor within
the satellite communist parties.

19. In terms of Yugoslavia's foreign relations, Tito is steadily moving toward closer integration with
the defensive system being built up by the free world. An important step in this direction is the
recent inauguration of contingent military planning talks first with the United States, United
Kingdom and France and shortly thereafter with Greece and Turkey. In the political field, a
Friendship Pact between Greece, Turkey, and Yugoslavia has recently been concluded.

20. These developments point toward ultimate integration of Yugoslav military capabilities with
those of the NATO powers and the consequent marked enhancement of Yugoslav defensive
strength against any aggression. Their significance in relation to the satellites lies in the extent to
which it is demonstrated that a practical alternative to continued acquiescence in Soviet domination
is being created.

21. The relationship which the United States has developed with Yugoslavia is of vital importance
in this process of augmenting Yugoslavia's effectiveness in the struggle against Soviet domination.
In addition, means of cooperation may be worked out with the Yugoslav Government on such
matters as action in the United Nations, propaganda, the reception and treatment of refugees from
the satellites and the exchange of intelligence. Moreover, the mere fact of substantial United States
economic and military assistance to Yugoslavia must have its effect on both communists and noncommunists in the satellite countries. The exposition before the world by Yugoslavia of its
experience with Soviet domination as a member of the Soviet bloc also provides excellent
refutation of Soviet propaganda.
Significance of Western European International Organizations

22. While there has been considerable discussion among the exiles of federation in Eastern Europe
following liberation, no concrete plans toward this end have been advanced. Neither have the
Western powers attempted to offer any specific proposals for unity of the satellite peoples or their
association with Western Europe after they are freed. The growing international organization of the
West reflected in NATO, the Coal and Steel Community and similar bodies nevertheless acts as a
disruptive influence upon the satellite orbit by helping to keep alive the hopes of the captive
peoples. Such organizations hold out to them (a) evidence of developing unity and strength of the
West essential to their ultimate emancipation, and (b) as an inviting alternative to the compulsory
dominion of the false internationalism to which they now belong, a glimpse of an integrated Europe
of free constructive possibilities in which they may take part once they are liberated.

Means of Attacking Soviet Domination of the Satellites

23. The means available to the United States to assist resistance to, and the eventual breakdown
of, the dominant Soviet influence in the satellites fall into the following general categories: (a)
political and diplomatic; (b) propaganda; (c) economic; (d) covert; and (e) military. It must be
recognized that, owing to the actual presence of Soviet power and the apparatus of Soviet control,
all these means, with the exception of the military, are of limited effectiveness, except possibly in
the case of Albania, whose peculiarly exposed position renders it susceptible to some measure of
economic pressure and to a greater degree of covert activities.

Political and Diplomatic

24. The major political and diplomatic capability is to exert the pressure of the unalterable United
States position as to the fundamental right of the satellite peoples to freedom, upon the existing
Soviet-controlled regimes. The United States can also utilize its position of free world leadership to
rally the support of the free world to this position and thus to strengthen and broaden the pressure
on the USSR and on those regimes. The United States can also exploit the German desire for unity
and a peace treaty in order to undermine the Soviet position in East Germany.

25. The United States still maintains diplomatic missions in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and
Rumania. This is advantageous in that it (a) provides useful opportunities for reporting and
intelligence acquisition, (b) shows American concern for the rights, welfare and eventual
independence of the satellite peoples, (c) makes possible direct contact with the government
concerned and facilitates dealing with such problems as the protection of American citizens and
property, (d) provides a vantage point which could be useful in the event of future develooments
that cannot be predicted, such as a major defection, and (e) provides a means for evaluating and
guiding our propaganda effort. The principal disadvantages are (a) the impression created in some
quarters that diplomatic relations indicate the acceptance of the legitimacy of the communist
regimes, (b) the pressures and harassments to which American representatives in the satellite
states are subjected, to the detriment of United States prestige, (c) the brake which the existence of
diplomatic relations may exercise on covert operations directed against satellite governments, and
(d) the continued presence of satellite missions in the United States. The possibility of opening
diplomatic relations with Bulgaria should be kept under review.

Propaganda

26. The progressive denial to the satellite peoples of access to truth and means of contact with the
outside world has limited the possibilities in the propaganda field almost entirely to broadcasting,
although balloons, air drops, etc., may be used occasionally with some effect to supplement this
medium. The operation of adequate technical facilities for broadcasting to the satellites and the
preparation of effective programs assume increasing importance in the effort to conserve and
promote anti-communist sentiment against the possible inroads of the communist monopoly over
the various media of information. Utilization of our propaganda facilities is conditioned by the
necessity of, on the one hand avoiding any commitments regarding when and how these peoples
may be liberated and any incitement to premature revolt, and on the other hand seeking to maintain
their faith in the eventual restoration of freedom.

Economic

27. Western controls of exports to the Soviet bloc and the Soviet drive for self-sufficiency have
reduced trade with Eastern Europe to a relatively low level. The economic measures available are
consequently of limited efficacy as implements to accomplish the general purposes of this paper.
They might, however, have some harassment value or could serve as auxiliaries to a coordinated
program based primarily on other measures. Existing trade controls have already made the
economic problems of the satellites more difficult and to this extent contribute to realizing the
specific purposes of United States policy toward the satellites.

28. Other economic measures, however, in so far as latitude is allowed by relevant legislation and
over-all United States policies, should be considered on a case-by-case basis, bearing in mind the
balance of advantage in each instance between the USSR and the free world. It is desirable to
maintain flexibility in U.S. economic policies toward the Soviet bloc and toward individual satellites,
in order that maximum advantage may be gained with the limited economic weapons at hand (both
restrictions and incentives). It is also desirable to have in reserve sufficient economic weapons to
bring pressure to bear against particular satellite regimes at particular times if doing so serves U.S.
interests. The application of such controls on a general basis, aside from the question of whether
they are worth while in terms of general aspects of United States relations with the USSR and our
free world allies, would tend to facilitate the integration of the satellites with the USSR, and would
make it impossible to maintain the desired flexibility. Only in the case of Albania is this perhaps not
true, for general economic measures by the West could serve to emphasize Albania's political and
economic isolation, while effective integration by the Soviets as a countermeasure would be under
present conditions most difficult.

Covert

29. Covert operations can be directed to the satellites (a) to gain intelligence, (b) to build up
organizational arrangements which will strengthen capabilities for resistance and constitute an
asset in the event of war or other situation where action against the regimes may be feasible and
desirable, and (c) to reinforce official United States propaganda, especially with the purpose of
keeping up the morale of the anticommunists and sowing confusion among the communists. To be
most effective, operations of this kind should be conducted so as to avoid encouraging divisive
forces among the anticommunists at home or the exiles abroad.

30. It is recognized that the difficulties of conducting covert operations have steadily increased
because of the mounting concern of the Kremlin for security throughout the Soviet bloc and the
growing effectiveness of the bloc-wide security apparatus. In consequence of these considerations,
as well as of physical difficulties, the mounting of any specific operations necessarily requires
considerable time for adequate preparation. Furthermore, in view of recent experience it is of the
utmost importance to proceed with extreme care in this field with a view to solid accomplishment
for the long run rather than to seek quick results in building up resistance capabilities (for military
utilization on the hypothesis of the early outbreak of war) at the greater risk of infiltration, detection
and embarrassment of United States political action and propaganda. The latter course may well
result in defeating the immediate aim of covert activity by disrupting any embryonic resistance
organization already created; it may also deliver a most serious blow to the broad efforts of the
United States in behalf of freedom for the people concerned.

31. Albania probably offers the best opportunity for the implementation of United States policy
through effective use of covert activities. Any undertakings designed either to promote internal
resistance or to introduce resistance forces from outside must take into consideration the impact of
any such development on the USSR and on other satellite nations. A careful and thorough
estimate of Soviet capabilities and intentions in regard to retaliatory action is essential. Also, full
attention must be given to the conflicting interests of Albania's immediate neighbors and of our
western allies. The conflicting aims and aspirations of Yugoslavia, Greece and Italy in regard to
Albania and Albania's territory could give rise to serious international complications if not fully
balanced on the basis of full understanding with them and other interested western powers prior to
any undertaking. Further, should any such covert operation require the collaboration of any of the
directly interested nations (Yugoslavia, Greece and/or Italy), the western powers should take steps
to ensure that their basic interest in reference to the ultimate independence of Albania be not
jeopardized.

32. Among the means at hand to assist in the attainment of United States objectives are defectors
and refugees from the satellites. It is questionable whether the mass flight of refugees from those
areas (or an increase in the mass flight in the case of East Germany) would be desirable from the
standpoint of United States interests, in view of the magnitude of the welfare and settlement
problem it would create and the loss of strength to any actual or potential resistance movements
within the satellite area. However, the defection of key personnel and potential recruits for a
Volunteer Freedom Corps offers considerable benefits to the United States and should continue to
be encouraged in accordance with existing policy. Defectors, exiled leaders and other refugees can
contribute to United States objectives by virtue of (a) their knowledge of conditions, trends and
personalities in their homelands, (b) such symbolic value as they may have to the peoples of their
homelands, and (c) their military potential. Although recognition of exile organizations, under
existing circumstances, as governments in exile would be inconsistent with the maintenance of
diplomatic relations with the satellite regimes and would be undesirable for other reasons, notably
because recognition would constitute a measure of commitment to groups whose value might be
altered by eventual developments, such organizations which are united and broadly representative
of the non-totalitarian elements in the satellite populations can be given general moral support and
other appropriate encouragement in their activities on behalf of the freedom of their peoples. When
they operate in the United States or with American funds the United States should seek by
appropriate means to have them abide by its general over-all guidance.

Alternative Courses of Action
The Three Alternatives

33. One alternative is to take direct action for the liberation of the satellite peoples from the USSR
by military force, either through direct military measures or through armed support of revolutionary
movements. Such exercise of military force would in all probability start a global war, except
possibly in Albania. In the case of the latter the probability of Soviet military counter action is
somewhat less than in the other satellites and the risk commensurately diminished but
nevertheless real and worthy of most careful consideration. This alternative could not be adopted
by the United States unless it were willing to undertake a global war for this purpose, and to wage it
in all probability without the wholehearted support of allied nations and of the United Nations.

34. The contrary alternative is to accept the fact of Soviet control of the satellites for an
indeterminate period, possibly as a basis for reaching some kind of negotiated accommodation with
the USSR, while United States efforts are devoted to areas beyond the present limits of Soviet
control in order to block Soviet expansion. To follow such a course, besides being inconsistent with
the fundamental principle of the right of the satellite peoples to freedom, would be to deny
ourselves means of reducing the over-all Soviet power position vis-a-vis the United States and its
allies. It may be reasonably assumed, moreover, that our acceptance of the legitimacy of the
present satellite regimes, even if it should require Soviet assent to some limited agreement with the
West, would be the course which the Kremlin would desire the United States to follow.

35. There is a large area between the extremes mentioned in the two preceding paragraphs in
which policy and action can be developed with the purpose of limiting and impeding the Soviet grip
on the satellites. Policy within that field would be determined with a view to contributing toward the
eventual elimination of dominant Soviet power over these peoples, but its usefulness need not
depend on its effectiveness in achieving this purpose within any given period of time. The more
immediate criteria for judging the desirability of any particular measures would be their
effectiveness in slowing down Soviet exploitation of the human and material resources of the
satellites, in maintaining popular resistance to and non-cooperation with Soviet policies, and in
strengthening those forces and factors which would minimize Soviet assets and maximize Soviet
liabilities in this area in case of war. Progress in this regard might bring the question of liberation of
one or more satellites to a status of greater actuality and immediacy; any acceleration of or change
in the United States policy could then be considered in the light of the situation existing at the time.

36. Adherence to this middle course, though it may preclude reaching any general accommodation
with the Soviet Union in the foreseeable future, might contribute to the creation of conditions which
will induce the Soviet leadership to be more receptive to negotiated settlements in line with U. S.
objectives toward the satellites. Action of this type, when it has reference to areas of direct concern
to certain western nations, can have far reaching consequences to our relation with our own allies.
It is desirable that every effort be made to obtain British and French support for this general course
of action. Any action regarding Albania, for example, which did not adequately take into account
the legitimate interests of Italy, Greece, and Yugoslavia might well result in a net loss rather then
gain to Western solidarity and hence to our fundamental interests. In addition to considerations of
Soviet capability of reacting in Albania itself, the possibilities of Soviet retaliatory action elsewhere
in the world must be taken into account.

U.S. Policy

37. Soviet domination of the satellite peoples violates the principle of freedom and selfdetermination of nations. It has also, by bringing Soviet power into the heart of Europe, created a
fundamental disequilibrium on the continent and a continuing pressure on Western Europe. So long
as it remains, the task of achieving security, stability and orderly progress in Europe must
encounter grave difficulties. The United States should make clear by its words and deeds that it
does not accept this situation as right or as permanent and that no accommodation with the Soviet
Union to the contrary effect can be countenanced.

38. A deliberate policy of attempting to liberate the satellite peoples by military force, which would
probably mean war with the USSR and most probably would be unacceptable to the American
people and condemned by world opinion, cannot be given serious consideration. The United States
should, however, direct its efforts toward fostering conditions which would make possible the
liberation of the satellites at a favorable moment in the future and toward obstructing meanwhile
the processes of Soviet imperialism in those areas. The possibility of early action in this regard in
Albania should be kept under continuing review in cooperation with our major allies.

39. In general, full advantage should be taken of the means of diplomacy, propaganda, economic
policy and covert operations to maintain the morale of anti-Soviet elements, to sow confusion and
discredit the authority of the regimes, to disrupt Soviet-satellite relationships, and generally to
maximize Soviet difficulties. Policies and action to be undertaken by the United States should be
judged on the basis of their contribution to these purposes, limited of course by such other factors
in the global policy situation as may be pertinent. For example, such questions as the maintenance
of diplomatic relations with satellite states, or the nature of economic pressures to be applied to
these states, should be decided strictly in terms of general advantages and disadvantages to the
United States, not of legalistic considerations or of the degree of indignation felt as a result of the
acts of satellite governments.

40. In its efforts to encourage anti-Soviet elements in the satellites and keep up their hopes, the
United States should not encourage premature action on their part which will bring upon them
reprisals involving further terror and suppression. Continuing and careful attention must be given to
the fine line, which is not stationary, between exhortations to keep up morale and to maintain
passive resistance, and invitations to suicide. Planning for covert operations should be determined
on the basis of feasibility, minimum risk, and maximum contribution to the fundamental interest of
the United States.

41. The United States should vigilantly follow the developing situation in each satellite and be
prepared to take advantage of any opportunity to further the emergence of regimes not subservient
to the USSR, provided such regimes would have reasonable prospects of survival. Considerations
of the relative vulnerability of the several satellites must enter into our calculations. In the case of
East Germany, such action will be within the framework of unification under acceptable conditions.
In the case of Albania it may prove possible to move more directly towards the removal and
replacement of the present pro-Soviet regime. United States action in any individual case would
have to be determined in the light of probable Soviet reactions in the immediate area involved, or
elsewhere, risks of global war, the probable reaction of our allies, and other aspects of the situation
prevailing at the time.

42. United States interests with respect to the satellites can be pursued most effectively by flexible
and adaptable courses of action within the general policy of determined opposition to, and the
purpose of the eventual elimination of, dominant Soviet influence over those peoples. Such action
should be within the limits of our capabilities as conditioned by our general policies. Thus the
existing power situation, the current policies of the Soviet Government, the effect of any action on
the satellite peoples, and the attitudes of the American people and of other free peoples must be
borne in mind.

Annex A
Estimated Satellite Ground Forces
April 1953

Country Army Security Troops Trained and Partially Trained Reserves
E. Germany 100,000 25,000 11,000

Poland 330,000 65,000 1,535,000

Czechoslovakia 185,000 35,000 1,195,000

Albania 40,000 10,000 80,000

Hungary 185,000 35,000 450,000

Rumania 267,000 56,000 1,275,000

Bulgaria 210,000 40,000 500,000

TOTAL 1,317,000 266,000 5,046,000

Annex B
Brief Survey of the Situation in the European Satellites
Poland

Poland has a population of 25 million and is the largest of the satellites both in number of
inhabitants and in amount of territory. Strategically and economically it is of high importance to the
USSR. It occupies the main approach to Germany and Western Europe and has been occupied
since the end of the war by Soviet military forces nominally serving as line communication troops,
to the number of several divisions. This fact, together with the country's easy accessibility to Soviet
troop movements, and the direct control of its own armed forces by Soviet officers, ensures Soviet
military and political domination.

Economically, Poland is important to the Soviet bloc primarily as the chief coal-producing country of
Eastern Europe, but also because of its merchant fleet and some of its other products such as
railway cars. Polish industry, emphasized over agriculture in the current Six-Year Plan (19501955), is less developed than those of Czechoslovakia and Eastern Germany, but is more
important than the industry of the Balkan satellites. Polish agriculture since the war has not kept
pace with the requirements of increased industrialization. This has been one factor in a tight supply
and distribution problem, particularly in foodstuffs, which has led the Communist regime into
extensive experimentation with market management, including a system of rationing and dual
prices that had to be abolished as unworkable early in 1953. Farm collectivization, though currently
being pushed more rapidly than ever before, is still in its early stage; only some 20 percent of the
arable land is as yet embraced in "producer cooperatives" and state farms together.

The Soviet-imposed Communist regime lacks the foundation of a historically strong Communist
Party, as the prewar Party prior to its dissolution in 1938 was numerically small, illegal and without
major influence. The present organization (called the United Polish Workers' Party), though
numbering 1.2 million members, is almost entirely a postwar creation based on Soviet support and
on the opportunism of thousands of job-holders. It also includes several thousand former Socialists
whose party was annexed under pressure in 1948, most of whom probably remain inwardly critical
of Soviet policy and Communist leadership. The Party is thought to harbor a strong latent tendency
toward what Moscow calls "nationalist deviation", though its principal symbol, Gomulka, was
purged in 1948. In particular the distrust and antipathy toward Germany which is traditional in the
nation at large is widely shared in the Party, despite the current Soviet line calling for German
unification and for close relations between the Polish and Eastern German Communist regimes.

Poland's overwhelmingly Roman Catholic character (95 percent of the people are Roman Catholic),
its strong sense of cultural and political community with the West, and its historic antagonism
toward Russia combine to render political assimilation to the Soviet system difficult. The Soviet
wartime annexation of the eastern two-fifths of Poland, the Katyn Forest massacres, and the Soviet
refused to aid the Warsaw uprising of 1944 against the Germans have deepened the anti-Soviet
disposition of the nation. Moreover, the successful large-scale wartime underground movement
against the Germans established a precedent for resistance to alien rule. Nevertheless, the
physical presence of strong Soviet military forces, combined with the efficiency of Communist
police controls, at present holds organized underground resistance to a minimum. The skeleton
organizations of a few formerly strong anti-Soviet underground movements are thought to exist still,
and to maintain tenuous contact with Polish exile groups in the West, but they do not currently
engage in any significant operations against the Communist regime.

A special feature of the Polish situation is the role of the territories annexed from Germany after the
war, which amount to approximately one-fourth of the total area of present-day Poland. Most of the
nation, regardless of political attitudes, supports the Polish claim to these territories. The
Communist regime exploits this popular feeling by stressing the fact that only the Soviet bloc is
willing to guarantee these territories to Poland. A major Communist propaganda theme, which has
not been entirely without effect among many Polish elements, is the charge that any retreat of
Soviet and Communist power from Poland under Western pressure would be bound to involve a
new hegemony of Germany over Poland and the forced retrocession of the Oder-Neisse territories
to Germany.

Czechoslovakia

Czechoslovakia, with a population of over 13 million, is the fourth largest European satellite
(following Poland, Eastern Germany and Rumania). Its special importance to the USSR lies in its
highly developed industry, particularly the size and diversity of its engineering industry and the
many-sided skill of its industrial population.

Owing to Czechoslovak industrial capabilities, Moscow has laid particularly heavy economic tasks
on Czechoslovakia. From a country of medium and light industry widely engaged in international
trade it has been forced to change over into a producer of heavy and medium industrial equipment
primarily for the USSR and the Soviet bloc. This change, involving Soviet demands for drastically
increased output in heavy industry, has brought manpower and raw-materia1 shortages,
consumer-goods scarcities and consequent inflationary pressure. The result is a more severely
strained economy than any other in the orbit.

Czechoslovakia presents Moscow with a complex problem of assimilation. Despite a pan-Slav and
pro-Russian cultural tradition, the nation is socially less akin to the USSR than most of the other
satellites. Like Eastern Germany it is more markedly middle-classed, urban and commercial in
character than the other satellites, and psychologically more closely tied to Western and Central
Europe. Its relatively long and successful practice of parliamentary democracy between the wars,
coupled with a highly conscious cultivation of a late-won right of national self-determination,
renders its accommodation to dictatorship and alien institutions psychologically difficult. Among the
workers, the Communists have not been able to destroy entirely the strong democratic trade union
traditions established in the interwar period. The difficulties of adjustment by the workers to the
changed role of trade unions under Communist dictatorship, together with the strains caused by
Soviet economic demands, result in dissatisfactions which the Communists are impelled to
recognize.

Unlike the situation in most of the other Soviet bloc countries, the Czechoslovak Communist Party
was legally recognized and relatively large in the prewar period and had experiences in techniques
of winning popular support. It has continued to be a mass party with present membership of 1.7
million, the largest Communist party in the world in proportion to the population, and therefore
remains heterogeneous in character harboring nationalist, trade unionist and pro-Western attitudes
to a degree. Furthermore, the sudden accession to full control by a coup in February 1948 and
tensions caused by Soviet demands led to difficulties in adjustments of the leadership to the new
situation, and drastic widespread purges developed culminating apparently in the elimination of
dissident factions and consolidation of the top leadership.

Ethnic problems which contributed in 1938-39 to the downfall of the democratic Republic, involving
particularly the Sudeten German and Slovak questions, still play a disturbing role. Agitation in
Germany for the return of the expelled Sudeten population and the possible reemergence of
Germany as a united and dominant power are feared by the Czechs, including the non-communist
majority. The Slovaks, who inhabit the eastern two-fifths of the country and comprise a fourth of the
population, are of different historical and cultural background from the Czechs, though they are
closely related ethnically. The Slovaks are much less highly industrialized, more strongly Catholic,
and less anti-German than the Czechs. Slovak nationalist tendencies find expression in the desire
for a clearly defined and established autonomy of the Slovak people in a free Czechoslovakia or,
with a number of the Slovaks, for the formation of an entirely separate Slovak state. The
Czechoslovak Communist Party has had to combat these nationalist tendencies in the party itself.
On the other hand, the Slovak question tends to divide anti-Communist forces.

Few if any genuine underground resistance organizations exist in Czechoslovakia, and although
there are no Soviet troops stationed there, Moscow's close control over the party police and armed
forces assures an effective security system which makes acts of overt resistance rare.

Hungary

Hungary, with a population of 9.1 million, is one of the smaller satellites. However, its economic
contribution to the USSR and its strategic situation on the Soviet lines of communication with
Austria and on the approaches to Italy and the Balkans make it a key satellite from Moscow's
viewpoint. Though it has only a narrow and mountainous common frontier with the USSR and
hence is less accessible geographically to the latter than Poland or Rumania, it is securely under
Soviet military domination owing to the presence of strong Soviet occupation forces within the
country and in neighboring Austria and Rumania.

Economically Hungary is important to the USSR as a large producer of foodstuffs, a supplier of
certain important raw materials (such as bauxite), and a well-developed manufacturing country
specializing in fine machinery and electrical equipment. A very rapid development of engineering,
backed by an unprecedented increase in output of such basic materials as coal and steel, was
scheduled in the Five-Year Plan of 1950-54, which was revised drastically upward after the
outbreak of the Korean war. The speed and concentration of this buildup in the sphere of producer
goods, to the neglect of consumer goods and agriculture, has created the same supply problems
as in other industrial satellites. Once a big exporter of foodstuffs, Hungary (following two bad
drought years in 1950 and 1952) is now experiencing food scarcities. A factor here has been the
steady socialization of agriculture, which now ranks with that of Czechoslovakia in proportion of
arable land (about 40 percent) in collectives and state farms.

Sovietization and Soviet control face peculiar difficulties in Hungary, owing to historical
Russophobia and to the traditional cultural pattern, which is directly antithetical to the SlavByzantine cultural forms. This antipathy is reinforced by memories of an earlier Soviet-type regime
in 1919, the only such case of repetition in the orbit. In religion the strong Roman Catholic and
Calvinist traditions work as primary institutional forces tying the nation to the West and delaying
psychological socialization, though the church leadership has largely bowed to state control.

The Hungarian Communist regime does not have a historically strong Communist party behind it to
provide even minority support of any significance. The Hungarian Workers' (Communist) Party is
largely a postwar creation out of heterogeneous elements and contains internal tensions of its own,
including latent enmity between Moscow-trained and domestically produced leaders. A distinctive
feature is the fact that the now dominant, Moscow-trained leadership is headed almost solidly by
Jews, a fact of widely ramifying implications for party cohesiveness in a country with traditional antiSemitic tendencies.

Rumania

Rumania, with a population of 16 million, is the third largest of the Soviet European satellites and is
of strategic and economic importance to the USSR. Geographically it is the key to Soviet control of
the Danube basin and Balkan peninsula. Its long common land and sea frontier with the USSR and
topographic continuity with the Soviet Ukraine and Moldavia facilitate Soviet military access and
domination, which is further ensured by the presence of strong Soviet occupation forces nominally
serving as line of-communication troops for Soviet forces in Austria.

Modern Rumanian cultural and political life has been oriented very pronouncedly toward Western
Europe. The national tradition inclines to Russophobia, intensified by hostility to the Soviet system.
The Communist Party was never large nor strong. No Communist-dominated partisan forces
developed during the war, and the Party played no significant role in the events of August 1944 by
which on King Michael's initiative the country was re-aligned on the side of the Allies. The
subsequent establishment of a Communist dictatorship was due exclusively to Soviet military
occupation and the importation of Rumanian and Bessarabian exile Communists from the USSR.
The latter were placed in controlling posts through direct Soviet dictation to King Michael by Soviet
Foreign Minister Vishinskii [Vyshinskii] in March 1945. Unlike the other satellite regimes, the
Rumanian Communist Party underwent no major purges or shifts during the first seven postwar
years. The first significant purges, involving Foreign Minister and Politouro member Ana Pauker
and two other top Communists, occurred only in 1952 and resulted in the concentration of party
and state powers in the hands of the new Premier and Party secretary-general Gheorghe
Gheorghiu-Dej. Though Gheorghiu-Dej has some personal following in the Party and among the
workers, a large part of the 700,000 Party members are loosely attached, opportunistic postwar
recruits to the movement.

Economically Rumania's chief contribution to the Soviet Bloc is its oil industry. Soviet control of this
industry and of other enterprises is in part exercised through Soviet-Rumanian joint companies.
Under the current Five-Year Plan (1951-55) a number of new manufacturing industries are also
being developed, while the electric power base is being greatly expanded. While these
developments apparently are proceeding with fewer complications than in Czechoslovakia and
Hungary, the inevitable inflationary pressures of the Communist-type development program are
much in evidence, resulting, for example, in the imposition of a discriminatory currency reform
(January 1952) which does not appear to have provided a basic alleviation or permanent solution
for the problem. Rationing and the dual price system are still in effect. In agriculture, which is
traditionally the larger sohere of the Rumanian economy, approximately 23 percent of the arable
land has been socialized in either collective farms ("producer cooperatives") or state farms, and
collectivization is gradually being pushed further.

Though both economic and political conditions cause general dissatisfaction, particularly among
the peasantry, there is virtually no attempt to conduct organized resistance or evasion, except on
the part of occasional scattered bands in mountain districts. Popular disaffection is expressed
mainly through individual acts of evasion or economic sabotage, listening to Western radio
broadcasts, and occasional individual flights abroad.

Bulgaria

Bulgaria, with a predominantly agricultural population of 7.3 million, is one of the smallest and
economically least developed of the satellites. Owing however to its numerically strong and highly
sovietized armed forces and to its forward geographical position at the southern end of the orbit, it
has an important role for Moscow as a military and strategic outpost of the USSR. Soviet military
access to Bulgaria is limited to the northern land frontier with Rumania and to the sea frontier on
the east; on the other sides the country is exposed to anti-Soviet states allied with the West:
Turkey and Greece on the south and Yugoslavia on the west. Nevertheless Soviet military
domination, based on the proximity of strong Soviet forces in Rumania and the USSR and on direct
control of the Bulgarian armed forces themselves by Soviet officers, appears secure.

This direct control through Soviet personnel, which extends also to the key branches of the
government, is a more pronounced feature of the Bulgarian Communist regime than of most other
satellites. It originated in the Soviet military occupation at the end of the war, and in the fact that
the Soviet-installed regime consisted in large part of Soviet~trained Communists, many of them
Soviet-Bulgarian dual citizens who had spent the war years in the USSR. The relatively greater
direct control by the USSR in Bulgaria is also undoubtedly motivated by the relatively backward
character of the country and by its strategic importance.

The Bulgarian Communist regime is based on a party with a well-marked tradition, whose
leadership in the 1920's and 1930's was the strongest of any of the Balkan Communist parties.
Since the war, however, the leadership has undergone more top-level alteration through death and
purging than most other satellite regimes and has been reduced to mediocrity. At present it is
composed of remanants both of the "Muscovite" (i.e. dominant Moscow-trained) element and of the
"nativist"-element, which are subservient to Moscow without being either efficient or (in the
Kremlin's view) completely dependable.

Economically Bulgaria remains essentially a backward agricultural country in the rudimentary
stages of partial industrialization. The first phase of industrialization initially involved expansion of
textile and food-processing industries and at present is concerned with construction of electric
power facilities, certain basic processing industries (principally chemicals and building materials),
and a few machinery assembly installations. It should also be noted that there are several uranium
mines in the Balkan mountains northeast of Sofia. In agriculture collectivization has been pushed
farther, and at an earlier date, than in any other satellite. Today over 50 percent of the arable land
is comprised in the so-called socialist sector mainly in the producer cooperatives, as there are few
state farms.

Bulgaria is linked closely to Russia culturally and historically, and has a Russophile tradition.
Russia played a prime role in helping establish an independent Bulgarian state in the 19th century,
free of Turkish rule. Nevertheless the effects of present Soviet control over Bulgaria have negated
rather than enhanced this tradition owing to widespread resentment of the Soviet-imposed
dictatorship and Soviet economic exploitation.

Albania

Albania is the smallest and most primitive of the satellites, and has a population of only 1.2 million
mainly peasants of whom a large proportion are mountaineers. It is also the only one of the Soviet
European satellites which is geographically isolated from the rest of the Soviet bloc. As such, it
presents a peculiar problem to the Soviets whose only uninterrupted access to Albania is by sea.
Because of this, Soviet control is based not so much upon military domination as it is upon a
strategic infiltration, by reliable Soviet personnel, of the entire Albanian political, economic, and
military structure, coupled with skillful exploitation of traditional Albanian fears of the territorial
aspirations of neighboring states.

Soviet control is, of course, exercised through the Communist puppet regime under the dual
leadership of the Premier and party Chairman Enver Hoxha and Interior Minister Mehmet Sehu.
There was never any significant Communist movement in Albania before the war, and the present
regime stems from the successful efforts of a small group of determined Communists who won
control of the Albanian underground movement during the war and seized power with aid from the
Yugoslav communists as the Germans withdrew.

In its beginnings the Albanian communist regime was closely dependent upon Yugoslavia. After
Tito's split with the Cominform in 1948 the regime went through a series of drastic purges of
alleged pro-Titoist elements. At present it appears firmly wedded to the Cominform and fully
capable of controlling any potential internal opposition.

The regime maintains its control through reliance on an elaborate security system, a number of
concentration and forced labor camps and the other communist methods of police terror and
intimidation. Its weakness lies in its failure to convert the majority of Albanians. Hostility to the
regime is reported to be widespread, extending even into the ranks of the army and into elements
of the security and police forces. The party itself, on the local level, is loosely organized and
composed in many cases of those who have joined for opportunistic rather than ideological
reasons. While not of a degree actually to endanger the regime's control, there is probably more
passive and active opposition to the Communist regime in Albania than in most of the other
European satellites.

Economic conditions in Albania have deteriorated markedly under the Communists. The situation is
aggravated by the country's present isolation from its natural trade sources in the west and Soviet
insistence on development of mining and industry at the expense of agriculture. At present the food
supply is very insufficient and determined efforts to collectivize agriculture, which have resulted to
date in socialization of approximately 6 per cent of the arable land, have not served to increase
production. Malnutrition and lack of clothing, fuel and medical assistance have had serious
repercussions on the morale of the people. In recognition of this situation the USSR and other
satellites have been forced to extend substantial economic assistance to Albania. Without this
assistance the Hoxha regime could not remain in power for any length of time.

Albania's geographic isolation makes it the most vulnerable of any of the satellites. Albanians,
however, fear that Albania's liberation from the Soviet orbit might result not in an independent
Albania, but in a partition of the country between some or all of the neighboring states of
Yugoslavia, Greece, and Italy. All of these countries have traditional aspirations to Albania or
Albanian territory which none has convincingly renounced. Further, these neighboring countries
mistrust each other's intentions toward Albania. As a result of this situation the present regime has
been able to represent itself to the Albanians, with considerable success, as the only true guarantor
of Albanian territorial integrity.

Eastern Germany

The Soviet Zone of Occupation in Germany, which was nominally transformed into a satellite by
Soviet creation of the puppet Communist regime of the "German Democratic Republic" in October
1949, is the latest of the orbit states formed on this model and is the second in size, with a
population of 18.5 million. In addition to its high strategic importance to Moscow in the struggle for
control of all of Germany, Eastern Germany makes an important economic contribution to Soviet
power by virtue of its highly developed and specialized industries.
East German progress toward effective satellite status has been slowed by its peculiar character
as part of a larger Germany under divided occupation, and by Soviet overall German policy,
including Moscow's professed desire for restoration of a unified and independent Germany. The
proximity of free German territory, a West German government, and strong Western military forces
in conjunction with the unsettled and dynamic character of the struggle of the Western Powers and
the USSR in Germany, has tended to encourage hopes of a change and resistance to Soviet
controls among the East German population, despite the presence of a powerful Soviet army of
occupation. In mid-1952 Soviet strategy shifted toward a more rapid and undisguised creation of a
completely bolshevized state in Eastern Germany. There is no evidence that this goal has been
abandoned though progress toward it has again been slowed since early June 1953.

The East German state apparatus is for all practical purposes managed through and by the
Socialist Unity Party (SED), a Communist-dominated organization formed in 1946 through the
Soviet-prompted fusion of Social Democrats with the Communists of the Soviet Zone. The
Communists have attempted to convert the SED into a Soviet-type Communist party, but it still
remains a rather heterogeneous and unwieldy organization, with 1.4 million members. It has been
unable to obtain strong working-class support. A portion of the youth, owing to intensive
indoctrination and a youth-slanted Communist program, apparently has come to furnish the largest
single element of support for the regime outside of the SED itself.

Within the framework of SED control of political life, a number of non-Communist political parties
are permitted to continue on a very limited basis, as part of the Soviet policy of maintaining a
facade of political freedom in Eastern Germany. These include the Christian Democratic Union
(155,000 members), the Liberal Democratic Party (100,000), the National Democratic Party
(50,000), and the Democratic Peasant Party (80,000). All are subservient to and dependent on the
SED. Aside from political parties the Protestant Church, embracing approximately three-fourths of
the East German population, represents the only other major institution retaining some
independence. As a competing center of spiritual allegiance, however, it too is currently under
strong state pressure to conform to the program of the regime.

In the absence of mass support, the regime exerts control by the normal authoritarian methods. In
mid-1952 its efforts to isolate the population physically from contact with the West increased
sharply, particularly with regard to movement between East and West Germany. These efforts
have been only partially successful. Movement continues on a significant scale across the frontier
between East and West Berlin. This gap in the East German security belt is also a gap in
psychological control since relatively easy access to West Berlin has facilitated refutation of
Communist propaganda regarding Western conditions. Moreover, the presence of Western forces
in Berlin is a major obstacle to the full consolidation of Communist control over East Germany. The
principal East German vulnerabilities to Western political warfare are the continuing East German
sense of remaining a part of the community of the West; the desire for a united Germany, the
example and attractive power of West Germany; and the fact that the East German regime patently
represents Soviet rather than German interests and is recasting East Germany in the Soviet and
satellite mold.

In early June 1953 the East German Government announced a series of measures largely
economic and social in nature modifying and in some cases apparently halting aspects of the
Sovietization program. This change may have been motivated in part by the realization that the
pace of industrialization and rearmament was too ambitious for East German resources and was,
along with increasing political repression, creating dangerous popular resentment though the new
program also conformed with current Soviet moves in the international sohere. Popular resentment
was at any rate demonstrated by a wave of strikes and riots on June 16 and 17 which forced the
employment of Soviet troops and the declaration of martial law. Despite some continuing reprisals
against participants in the disturbances and other possible steps to counteract future riots, the
regime seems for the present to be continuing certain measures of relaxation.
