 

MORI DocID: 1480686

 

Gy
io?
NOV 18 1959
APPROVED FOR RELEASE J ' vl oX
DATE: SEP 2007 ¥
€ \

MEMORANDUM FOR: Special assistant to the Director
SUBJECT: twinter of Discontent"
REFERENCE 2 Memorandum to Allen Dulles from C. D. Jackson

dated November 16, 1953, above subject

le I have discussed the above reference with John Bross, Chief of
EE and we agreed that in view of the very short period of time permitted
for comment, the following points should be suggested to Mr. Dulles for
purposes of the OCB meeting.

a. ‘The premises set forth by Mr. Jackson in paragraphs 1 and
2 of the reference do not entirely coincide with ow understanding
of the present intelligence on the areas in question. we believe
that under any circumstances, these premises should be carefully
checked with the appropriate people on Bob sAnory's staff.

be. Asauming however that some form of active discontent is
evidenced in the satellites in question, we would feal it very
important for each of the questions raised in paragraphs 3 and |,
of the reference to be considered by the State Department. It
is our feeling that the Russians have made it pretty clear that
they intend to keep control of Poland, Czechoslovakia and last
Germany and it is further our feeling that regardless of the
sise of any imagined uprising, the Russims have ample power to
maintain their control unless substantial military assistance is
provided by one or more of ths free world powers. Since it-is
our understanding that no such outside aid is contemplated within
present policy, it would seem contrary to our best interests as
well as those of the satellites to undertake any action which
might be construed as sponsoring active opposition to the Soviet
within any part of the Soviet Bloc. we would therefore assune
for example that RIAS would not undertake any relaying of a
strike call or in any way be a medium for urging such a call or
even urging riots. On the other hand et might well, as it
did during the June 17 riots, broadcas? Haws 1 Wf jgvents
which had already occurred. a: PPT AF

c. With regard

   
nn

MORI DocID: 1480686

  
  

iy information

ce With regard to renewal of food offers we fecl that
there are so many considerations such as the accuracy of the
premises mentioned above, the availability of food, the method
whereby such offers are made (¢.g. how would they be made to
Poland as distinguished from an adjoining territory like
East Germany), that it is impossible,on short notice, to do
any more than recommend further analysis of available intelligence
and other related problems.

d. with respect to an offer of asylum to border guards, it
is our understanding that it is the United States position that
asylum will be offered to anyone who defects for political
reasons, consequently the only issue in this respect would seem ..
to be to what extent repetitions of the asylum offer would be
made public in order to persuade possible defections plus
helpful action prior to defection. On this point we feel that
it would certainly be useful to make know again the poasibility
of asylum if a situation of active unrest develops.

ee VWith respect to diplomatic exploitation in case of unrest
it has been our feeling for some time that appropriate exploitation
of this kind would be most helpful. This however is so strictly a
State Department issue that we feel that we can only state our
view that State should examine the possibilities with a view to
doing anything which it oan justify.

f. With regard to paragraph 5 dealing with the Far East, [
can only say that again I would like to have the factual premises
carefully checked and state that it has been the regular line
through such assets as we have (which as you know are pretty
limited on the Mainland) to use any and all subjects which might
be a basis for separating the Chinese comumists from the USSR.

ge One additional point which I would like to add on my om namely that the questions raised by Mr. Jackson seem to me to
depend fundamentally on the answer to what the United States is
trying to accomplish both in the iumediate future and in the
Longer range future in relation to the curopesn satellites. fhis
problem has been raised by Mr. Conmt a number of times and has
been raised by various individuals in CI 8 number of times. I+
has been our feeling for some time that unless we are prepared to
support, in some substantial way, active opposition to the Soviet
by the peoples of the satellites, we should be extremely cautious
about either fostering such opposition or giving it too much
encouragement without aid in case it should break out spontaneously.
The reason for this is obvious, namely that absent really useful
help, the other support can only buy us a very short term good
will wnich will, in all likelihood, backfire into resentment in
case punishment is meted out and no real freedom obtained. This

21S Gelso dbons

 

 
MORI DocID:

 

caution seems to us particulacly importent to consider at the
moment since the Russia intention to remain in the areas in
question, particularly Esat Germany, appears to be far firmer
at this time than was the case on June 17. Consequently it
may not be unreasonable to assume that more severer msasures
will be used to quell opposition should it occur at present
than was the case on June 17.

G. TRACY BAHNES
GeP

 
   

Coy tiihiGl

1480686

 
