 

C05459003

 

 

COPY
THE WHITE HOUSE ~~
Washington y °

November 16, 1953 + |
MEMORANDUM T0; Allen Dulles
FROM: C. D. Jackson
SUBJECT: “Winter of Discontent”

lL. There is a sensing in the intelligence community that serious
food scarcities are going to affect Soviet control of their satellites
during the eoming winter. While actual starvation is not expected, there
may be bread lines and a very tight supply situation in Poland and
Czechoslovakia. In East Germany, although Soviet relief activities have
been fairly successful, the discontent of the large industrial population
is expected to continue, and from an operational standpoint, this area
promises to be a prime target of opportunity.

2. This raises the question as to whether our prior thinking, such
as reflected in the "Interim Psychological Strategy Plan for Exploitation
of Unrest in Satellite Europe" (PSB D-45, dated July 1, 1953) and related
consolidating papers, has taken sufficient account of the various contingencies which might arise. I am particularly concerned with what actions
we could take if we were faced with a repetition of the June 17 incidents
on a widespread scale, an indigenous general strike call, or food riots.
We might even be confronted with a premature mass uprising "a la Warsaw"
deliberately provoked by the Soviets.

3. Should any of the foregoing events occur, there will be many
questions requiring both clarification and a good measure of agreement
among us before we can go into action. Would RIAS participate in relaying
an indigenous general strike call, or a repetition of a June 17 march
through the streets? Should renewed offers of food relief be made to
the satellite governments and the USSR? In the event of East German
border incidents, should we guarantee asylum to border guards who aid
and abet any flight to freedom of beleagured people?

4, Furthermore, if unrest occurs in East Germany or Czechoslovakia,
should it not be exploited diplomatically by means of a note to the Soviet
Government, placing squarely the responsibility for any turmoil on the
Soviet regime's dilatory maneuvers with respect to a settlement of the
German problem? Since, in order to obtain maximum effect, such a note
would have to be coordinated with France, England, and the Bonn Government, we might want to consider an approach to these governments even before the event.

 

‘APPROVED FOR RELEASE.

| IDATE: 15-Feb-2011
- |
a0 - 0 LOGS a) a ia

 

: - oft
E RSNA i T
iy : IPF ee
in i ee a

 
 

 

C05459,003

of

COPY Yo stinatiorny
-2
5. In the Far East there appears to be another situation readymade for exploitation. The Chinese Communist regime has been forced
by a summer of flood, drought, and insect plague to allocate 900,000
tons of food to famine~-stricken areas while, at the same time, it continues to export wheat from Manchuria to the USSR. Not only should this
permit us to discredit communist "agrarian reform" throughout all of
Asia, but it should enable us to expose the true nature of the SinoSoviet relationship.

6. Other opportunities as well as other questions will undoubtedly
occur to you. Because I feel strongly that we mst take stock of our capabilities for exploiting the forthcoming "winter of discontent”, I propose
that we discuss this problem at our next OCB meeting.
