PSYCHOLOGICAL STRATEGY BOARD
WASHINGTON, D.C.

July 8, 1953

MEMORANDUM OF INFORMAL PSB MEETING, JULY 8, 1953.
Place: Office of the Deputy Secretary of Defense

Present: Messrs. Jackson, Smith, Kyes, Dulles, Stassen and Morgan.

Agenda Item 1. Report from the Under Secretary of State on the Advisability of
Food Relief for East Germany.

The Board approved the plan to ship food to Eastern Germany developed by an
interagency working group chaired by Mrs. Eleanor Dulles, subject to changes
noted in sub-paragraphs b, d, and f, below. Principal features of the plan are:

a. That Ambassador Conant be instructed to suggest to Chancellor Adenauer
that his request for food be addressed directly to the President.

b. That the President reply to Adenauer along the lines of the draft which has
been prepared by the working group, except that synagogues be mentioned
along with Catholic and Protestant churches as suggested distribution agencies
if appropriate to conditions in East Germany. A direct approach to the Soviet
Government which is proposed in the draft reply is believed to be most suitable
under the circumstances.

c. That the bulk of food be taken from U.S. agricultural surpluses in this country
supplemented by surplus Army C rations now available in Europe, and possibly
some food from the Vienna stockpile.

d. That the distribution should be through the German churches (and
synagogues if appropriate, as stated above), but that “charitable organizations”
not be mentioned for this purpose lest the Soviet Government seize this
opportunity to utilize communist fronts.

e. That appropriate members and committees of Congress be consulted.
f. That the British and French Ambassadors in Washington be informed, but that
endorsement of their governments should not be requested because of the

probable delays involved.

g. That the interagency working group which developed the plan be assigned
action on it.
Mr. Stassen agreed to make funds available and to assign a project manager to
superintend operations. Mr. Kyes offered to make military air transport available
to fly in at least some initial shipments of food for spectacular effect. He asked
me to let him know what specific requests were to be made along this line and
also with regard to amounts and destinations of surplus Army C rations.

[...]
[Signed]

George A. Morgan
Acting Director
