Psychological Strategy Board
17 June 1953

Memorandum for: Mr. George A. Morgan
Through: Mr. Mallory Browne
Subject: East Berlin Riots

lt is accepted by both State and CIA that today's riots in East Berlin were a
spontaneous result of a planned demonstration yesterday. It is understood,
although not definitely Known, of course, that the Soviets staged yesterday's
demonstration against increased productivity quotas in order to react to them by
cutting back those quotas. However, over night the workers took the initiative
themselves and carried on with a spontaneous uprising far beyond the Soviets
plan. We know from press reports and from a conversation with Berlin this
morning that the Soviets have moved tanks and machine gunners into East
Berlin, and already three casualties have occurred. The press reports, especially
by the AP and CBS, have been verified by Mr. Lyon in Berlin in a phone
conversation this morning as well as by Mr. Reber in his talk with Mr.
Riddleberger, also this morning. The State Department (GER) has prepared a
briefing paper for Mr. Smith to be used at today's luncheon. This paper,
attached, covers the most significant items of information about what Is going on
in Berlin and describes in the 4th paragraph the guidance which had been
issued to U.S. overt media. It is important to note the caution included in this
guidance in the last paragraph.

several additional ideas were suggested during my conversation with the GER
officers who drafted the attached briefing paper, but were not included largely
because of the caution with which State is approaching this situation. For your
guidance, however, at today's luncheon when the subject will probably be
brought up, | should like to set them forth here:

a. It would be important to suggest the possibility of more resistance to the
Soviet regime within the Zone. Such resistance need not be violent—in fact it
should preferably be passive—but the possibility that seething unrest might
break out into open violence at any time would put the Soviets on the alert and
make it necessary for them to make a show of armed strength throughout the
Zone. This has obvious psychological implications with respect to the “workers
paradise” and the insincerity of what the Soviets mean by “peaceful unity.”

ob. There has been an increase in the defection of Volks Polizei in the last 24
hours. Along with the defection earlier this morning of Otto Nuschke, this is
significant particularly in the light of the Vopos' participation in the military
maneuvers to quell today's riots. The obvious possibility exists in this connection
to undermine the whole Vopo structure.

c. The “boomerang” effect of the Soviet campaign to incite East Germans to
demonstrate against the Adenauer Government should not be ignored. They
have been urging such riots for the past six months; now they have their riots,
but not the way they expected them.

d. With the reservation that we should not tend to create chaos in West Berlin, it
might be helpful if the East Germans could, [one line sanitized] be persuaded to
“blur” the border between the Soviet Zone and East Berlin. The Soviets will try to
use these demonstrations as an excuse for sealing off their section of the city
from the Soviet Zone; any leverage we have to forestall such a move could be
profitably employed at this juncture.

e. Although it is perfectly valid to avoid any outbreak of East-West violence by
encouraging sympathy demonstrations in the West sectors, some advantage
might be derived from the presence in the West Zone of Soviet guards at
Rundfunkhaus and at the Soviet memorials in the Western sectors.

f. A high level statement by the President would be useful to reiterate our
position in West Berlin and to put the Soviets on notice that this kind of tactic is
going to avail them nothing in so far as Berlin unity, German unity, Four-Power
negotiations, etc. are concerned. The President should also make it clear that
although we do not want to see East Berliners leave themselves open to armed
violence at the hands of the Soviet military, we are encouraged by their spirit
and feel gratified that they have taken the initiative in expressing their
dissatisfaction with communist tyranny.

g. The more we can commit the communist either to give in to the Germans
and/or to reverse themselves and take more repressive measures, the more we
will put them on the defensive.

h. Obviously we should exploit the fluidity of the East-West travel situation
wherever possible to increase our defection operations [one line sanitized]. It will
be extremely important to use discreet German outlets to warn the East
Berliners and the East Germans for that matter, against exposing themselves to
armed force which would achieve nothing, or to sudden reversals of communist
policy which would find them out on a limb. In other words, the Easterners
should neither get themselves shot in their enthusiasm nor take measures on
which they cannot follow through and would leave them at the mercy of the
communist authorities at some future date.

i. There have been three casualties already today in East Berlin—workers who
have been shot seriously by the Soviet soldiers. If any one of these casualties
becomes a fatality, tt would be important immediately to “martyrize” this
individual throughout the world. Dependent upon the time factor his death might
also be used in the Rosenberg framework—while shouting for the lives of the
Rosenbergs the communists would have taken the life of one of their own
citizens, for much less reason to put it mildly.

From the long-range point of view, | would certainly suggest that all possible
emphasis be placed on two aspects of the current development in Berlin. The
first is that these minor relaxations are not to be construed as real deeds in the
sense that the President used these words on April 16; the second is that peace
and unity in Germany will not be created at pistol point. Further | would
emphasize most strongly that large scale efforts be made to mobilize Social
Democrat opinion throughout Western Europe, especially in the Low Countries
and Scandinavia against the Soviet/communist unity campaign on the basis of
this kind of demonstration. This is not the road to Four-Power negotiations; if this
is what the Soviets want, this is not the way to get it.

lt is suggested that PBS immediately study the possible Soviet exploitation of
this situation so as to provide the means of forestalling whatever advantage the
Soviets hope to gain from it psychologically.

John M. Anspacher
Encl. [not included]

6/17/53 Memo to Mr. Phillips
from GERIP—Richard Straus
