INCOMING TELEGRAM
Department on State
ACTION COPY

Control: 6114
Rec'd: June 17, 1953 2:37 p.m.

From: BERLIN
To: Secretary of State
No: 1670, June 17, 6 p.m.

French chairman Commandant called meeting this morning at 11 to consider
situation arising from disturbances in East Berlin.

French Commandant reported that some thousand Germans have entered
French sector from East Zone with intent [to] cross into East sector of Berlin to
demonstrate. French officers, having noted that sector border was guarded by
VOPOS and Soviet soldiers carrying automatic weapons, warned demonstrators
against proceeding into Soviet sector. West Berlin police had been asked to
assist in this matter, but their hearts not (repeat not) obviously in work.
Commandants agreed that as their mission Berlin was to maintain law and
order. West Berliners and Soviet Zone residents transiting the West sectors
should if possible be dissuaded from mixing in East Berlin demonstrations where
serious possibility of bloodshed existed.

Commandants also agreed situation near sector border of West Berlin sympathy
demonstration scheduled for this afternoon appeared undesirable.

Commandanits then called in Acting Mayor [Walter] Conrad and Police President
[Johannes] Stumm and French chairman informed them as follows:

1. Commandants consider their primary duty to maintain law and order in their
sectors in Berlin. They appreciate sympathy of West Berliners for their fellow
citizens in the East.

2. Commandants will not (repeat not) oppose orderly meeting or demonstrations
of sympathy. However, they feel it their duty to warn West Berliners of grave
consequences which might result were West Berliners to participate in
manifestations in East Sector. In this they are expecting the usual full
cooperation of West Berlin police.
3. Commandants understand that West Berlin meeting is scheduled to take
place at six this evening at Oranien Platz (SPD-sponsored sympathy rally).
Commandants have no (repeat no) objection to such a meeting taking place, but
feel that place chosen is too close to sector border and consequently might
result in serious consequences. They, therefore, request that another meeting
place be selected more removed from sector borders.

4. Commandants scarcely feel it necessary to remind [West Berlin] Senat that
status of Berlin is Allied responsibility and expect Senat to take no (repeat no)
initiative to change it without consulting Allied Kommandatura.

Dr. Conrad speaking in name of Senat said the Senat had no (repeat no)
objection to Commandants’ proposals. He pointed out that both yesterday and
today he had been purposefully reticent so as not to give Soviets or GDR
excuse to say that Western authorities behind movement. Conrad said his point
of view was shared by the three parties, with the leaders of which he had just
met and by his colleagues in the Senat. He indicated that they understood that
West Berliners could not (repeat not) adopt callous attitude but that they must be
very careful in every act they take particularly in expressions which might be
made at meeting planned for this afternoon. He reported that the street cars,
buses, S-bahn, and U-bahn in East ceased functioning; also that East sector
was controlled by Soviet tanks and that very few VOPOS were in evidence; most
of latter reportedly deployed to sector zonal borders to prevent influx of masses
from East Zone into East Berlin. Conrad indicated that deputation from East
Zone was at this moment awaiting him at the Rathaus.

Police President Stumm confirmed reports on transportation situation. He said
reports indicated that large crowd had assembled in Leipzigerstrasse near GDR
Government headquarters, which was cordoned off and protected by Soviet
troops. Crowds had been dispersed there with hoses. He also said HO building
Potsdamer Platz had been stoned. He confirmed there had been no (repeat no)
demonstrations hostile to West Berlin. Situations here calm and police were fully
alerted. Conrad then indicated he had emphasized when questioned by foreign
journalists today and yesterday that situation in the East was in his opinion
entirely soontaneous and not (repeat not) as had been suggested (a) inspired by
American instigators (b) inspired by Soviet military in attempt to rid themselves
of SED leaders.

Conrad also requested Allied assistance in air passage for Reuter to return to
Vienna tomorrow.

Conrad asked that House Representatives Council of Elders be permitted to
decide where this afternoon’s meeting of sympathy be held, emphasizing that
city officials’ views re danger of meeting to close to sector borders coincided
with those of Commandants. Conrad also suggested that if there was much
bloodshed in East, Commandants consider visiting Soviet officials and urging
restraint.

Lyon

TT:HMR/14
Note: Advance copy to GER 5:25 p.m. 6/17/53 CWO-JRL
