INCOMING TELEGRAM
Department on State
ACTION COPY

Control: 4780
Rec'd: June 13, 1953
5:08 p.m.

From: Bonn
To: Secretary of State
No: 5321, June 13, 5 p.m. (SECTION 1 of 2)

SENT DEPARTMENT 5321 REPEATED INFORMATION LONDON 917 PARIS 1279 MOSCOW
UNNUMBERED.

Churchill's soeech, reports of impending Bermuda conference, Semenov [Semyonov] appointment,
indications of truce in Korea and recent events in Soviet Zone have given powerful impetus in
Federal Republic to speculation and controversy over four-power talks. As we see it, subject has
three main aspects in Western Germany at present: (A) Potential effect of talks or prospect of talks
on general election campaign, (B) Divergencies in estimating Soviet readiness at this time to make
real concessions on German unity; and (C) as contrasted with election pronouncements on subject,
question of what type of settlement would actually be acceptable to various political groups.

(A) SPD, which was privately pessimistic about its election prospects up to two months ago, hopes
to find long-sought campaign issue in subject of four-power conferences, presenting itself as only
party in Federal Republic which is really working for German unity. Not (repeat not) at all essential
to SPD that conference actually commences, as long as possibility exists and SPD can build
appeal to voters around it, maintaining that only SPD is really in favor conference, only SPD has
concrete ideas for conference, and SPD best qualified party represent German interests if
conference held. As appears from our telegram reporting Ollenhauer-Conant conference (pouched
unnumbered Department, London, Paris, Moscow, 6 June 1953) and from later Wehner interview
with press, SPD apparently prepared go irresponsible extremes in advocating talks, even to extent
of accepting further reparations for Soviets and principles of Potsdam as framework for talks. While
disclaiming neutralism, party appears prepared to consider system of guarantees and nonaggression pacts for unified Germany to be underwritten by U.N. through U.N. membership for
united Germany, which would not (repeat not) be permitted to make other alliances. Ollenhauer
and other SPD leaders have also frequently mentioned international position of Sweden as
possibility for united Germany. It is true that Chancellor outmaneuvered SPD in 10 June Bundestag
foreign policy debate by placing party in position where it could not (repeat not) refuse to vote for
Bundestag resolution containing declaration that united Germany must have freedom to ally itself
with whatever country it pleases. We do not (repeat not) believe, however, that this limitation on
SPD utilization of unity theme would be maintained for long if SPD saw good election reason ignore
its own vote. Difficult at this time predict public impact current party line if SPD decides to push it as
explicitly in campaign as it now does in private. Given present atmosphere in Federal Republic, no
(repeat no) political party can afford public opposition to principle of four-power meeting which
would treat unity problem, regardless of what they think of prospects for success. Even Chancellor
and CDU are shifting to half-hearted public support for talks. Privately, Chancellor and coalition
leaders remain categorically opposed to talks prior to Federal Republic elections because they fear
that SPD's exploitation of unity issue during talks would greatly reduce popular appreciation for
Chancellor's foreign policy achievements, create confused emotional atmosphere in Federal
Republic, and tempt coalition politicians to try to outdo SPD in pushing for unity at any cost. Given
domestic political situation and apparent popular support for talks in France and Britain, Chancellor
hopes to get U.S. support in his aim of delaying talks.

Reber
