Secret Security Information
Rec'd: May 29, 1953

From: Moscow 1:17 p.m.
To: Secretary of State
No: 1653, May 29, 5 p.m.

DEPT PASS BONN, LONDON, PARIS, SENT DEPT 1653, RPTD INFO PRIORITY BONN 348,
PRIORITY LONDON 220, PRIORITY PARIS 482

Taken by itself and pending further clarifying developments, transfer of control in Germany to High
Commissioner does not (rpt not) in our mind, provide clear clue to Soviet ultimate intentions in
Germany but following interesting features may be noted at this time.

1. Arrangement equates status of Soviet control in Germany to that of western powers after a delay
which to German eyes must seem long overdue and with a lag concerning next step which in case
Western Germany is projected in establishment Embassies following EDC ratification.

2. Certainly no (rot no) abandonment of East German Republic is indicated, but on contrary, latter's
continued existence seems confirmed by reference to representation Soviet interests in Republic
and control over its authorities. This represents follow-up of line taken by Ulbricht and Grotewohl in
their May 9 anniversary declarations (EMBTEL 1571, May 8).

3. Potsdam is reaffirmed as basis authority occupation powers, thus offering justification for
continuation of rigorous economic and reparations policy in Soviet zone.

4. By reference to area of four-power contact in matters of “all-German concern” (a transparent
inconsistency at this juncture) decree seems to leave door open nevertheless to conclusion of fourpower arrangements on modus vivendi basis in such matters perhaps as air corridors, transport,
etc.

5. No (rpt no) mention made controversial issue of Berlin nor status Soviet command in that city.

Decree which is published without comment today's press represents significant reversal of
appointment a month ago of person of Yudin's past prominence to post political advisor in place of
Semenov [Semyonov] who was then assigned to Foreign Ministry. Reorganization may conceivably
have been prompted in part by pressure from East Germany whose leaders have recently shown
assertive mood and who are rumored to be seeking consolidate their control by freezing out
remnants of liberal and church parties in Soviet zone. There has been some speculation here that
Yudin was sent to Germany to remove him from Russian scene where he seems to have been
involved in intricate machinations under Stalin regime. As to Semenov, he is tough, capable,
realistic, cynical and tricky. Respect paid to him by Sokolovsky [Sokolovskii] whom he served as
post-war political advisor in Germany, and by Gromyko at Palais Rose Paris Conference, seems to
indicate that he has always enjoyed considerable power in German affairs, possibly extending
beyond Foreign Office support connections with the highest circles, including Soviet police and
Army.

Bohlen
BB :KC/11
Note: Passed Bonn, London, Paris 5/29/53 1:25 p.m. JP

[Source: NARA, RG 59, 762.0221/5-2953.]
