 

CUD4E9D9USY EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs

&

 

ICONFIDENTIAL

 

a Hp 18 iS

 

 

 

ee OE ee (74)
$ Merch 1957
| 4 FOR THE RECORD
|
SUBILET: Macting with Under Zeoretary of Siste
Robert G. Maxghy on Saterday, £ March
REFERENCE: Gepasinasat of Bate Mame, dated

10 January 1997

PARTICIPANTS: State: Mr. Robert G. Muyphy
ids. W. Tepley Bennett, Jr.
hr. BR. Bemden Rearas
ate. Jack Mower

CiA: Mx. Allan W. Gules
ker. F¥ank G. Wisaar

lL. Be was agreed that the protlems raised in shave reference
were of eefflelast scope and complexity to require the formation of 5
joiet trate, CIA and USIA Special Couamalives within the tarcia of the
OGM maovhenian. Myr. BE. Allan Lightner, Jr. of State wee accepted
| os Chnizesen, ant Div. Reare ac the other Stele camber. For CLA
it was agreed that Mix. WiteGereld and Me. Meyer would be the Agency's
|
|

er Me. Batten wee agreed te 62 one of the USIA

and Nate sadertock te discuad with USLA the nesination ef a sexend reprenentative to raplace Me. Barvting wha had
previously bees suggested, but whe is now unavailable. tate accepted
the responsibility of calling the Comnaittes tegether.

ad. Regawding the iuewe of budgetary prieviiies as raised is
| Recemencadation Na. 1 of velerence, Mr. Duties palated out that
, there were oo present plans fer the physical cxpineton ;

 

 

[APPROVED FOR RELEASE |. |
IDATE: 16-Feb-2011

ee,

 

 

ag
CUD459038

 

 

 

 

 

fei in Landen and ths Iavne Wold have bebe doce when nad

3, Regarding Rececamendation No. 7 af taterence, the history of

project nod that Radio Liberation was in need af uxgent advice as te
whether to sign an acceptable coutract fer the inittel instelletion of 5
LO0~low trasuenitter tn ipain. hte. Marphy suld that the Suvean ef the
Budget had veeently quevtianed hin: a0 to whether the Stele Department
weuld atitl gront pellny approval te such an expansion. Mer. Murphey
atated thet ha had wet given & yas on ne answer te the Busens and he
agreed that this janes eheouid be placed badere the Special Conmelites
defined aheve ior tuanediats treseiution,

4, As extended discussien teok place regatding Recew:
Ne. Sef veference, Mr. Murghy salt that the recent Husgariza

 

, : : enmvineing
evideace that there was a present need for redusing the BEE brentcests
to atther Meagary or Poland or the ether Satellites. Reference was
made by Me. Moyer te the extensive aelqotific poll conducted by the
International Research A 7

cual : ™
Poland that RFE was playing an affective and responsible vole in Polish
affarte to secure 4 degree of independence fram the Soviets. The

iste ropresestatives agreed that the situation fu Wungary had changed

 
 

CUD4DYUS8
jo

 

 

Manse for the Record
§ March 1457
Page 3

pr ardhieiribirarie ray tnibeboinenbite prrngry-Tnycleandutly: wanes

 

woald be conatdexed jointly by tate and CLA aed then subealited to the
Special Camaittes foe final review.

&. Regaeding Recemmcndation No. 5 of reference, i: was faily
ogtend thet beth RFE. aad Radio Liberation should continue te canterm
Pelle, Dead bad demnactnnt, eee. Fe trent tt RFR's
Pelish Desh bad demeuntrated aimixabi¢ sinkeghis and ealf~rectraint

 

 

 

 

 

 

i
‘greed Unk events had evertahen poiley ia tide Meld,” sed! that the oid

 

___ that the Free Surepe Committe kad been re~

ceived te wodartahe prey te owknued ts euieh ine
ous aed be

sinae USIA ie nut involved. wo the

 
oo

 

A ono for the Racoed
§ Mayveh 1957
Page 4

 

a, Megarding Recommendation Ne. ? of veisrence, there was
agreement thit the problem of incesiced preadeasting 16 the AstanAdviens avea should he a subject of separate discasston between J:ata,
Cid. suk UREA, wether than being included on the Agenda of the Special

 

oquenannts naa elitdte 40 oubube danuuniote on tenuan these whe
ce on Germany by diversifying
seme Sin sibes slnwit he enniiaeand nad Sib. Wiener painted ous tho

 

CORD MEYER, Jc.

CORD MEYER, IR.

 

 

 
