- Yr [> “2445 / >
oo 1"

 

CUL441023

24: f2document consists of 10

Th, ;
of: 12 copies.

2,7 KJ SECRET pages. Number __ éy
. \\ 4 . Series B. >
MEMORANDUM oe
—
Le Re Higgs, Special jissistant for Operations, Department of State eS |) ;
PROM; Te Me. Necknagel, American knbassy, Bonn 2az
ol C) co
SuLJiCT: Hunparian Reaction to Western Radio Broadcasts 20 ¢
Yigg a
Pees s Department Telegram 1437, November 26, 1956 Wg 8
wl PS
3 3 oS

 

In the period from December 9 to Decemter 22, 1956, I sonducted

vsrraximetely 100 interviews with Hungarian refugees in the Salzburg
Most of the refugees vere in the refugee encampment at Camp

epea, Mos , ¢ :
“jezenhetm (Roeder), Salzburg, Austria, where they were being "processed"
for entry into the United States as "parolees". Posvibly 15 percent of
the Loterviews were with persons either not in Camp soeder or deatined
rome other country other than the United States.
“he primary purpose of these interviews was to develop information
oi ascistanee in evaluating the reaction of the Hungarian people to
t roadcasts beamed at Hungary ty various western media, and particularly
Espec::2 attention was paid to {information which might
Sn cicate whether the Hunyari..n refugees echo the charges voiced in various
i

Phoysy

Uh ted “tates media. 3
aerelas in the west that Radio Free Lurope and to a lesser extent, the
ce of America were ruilty of inciting rebellion and of ma&ing false

promises | to the Hungarian people of material aid from the West.

It is recognized that the interviews conducted at Salzburg are
criticism that they were all conducted »ith persons whose

nossibly open to the
untry into the United States had already been approved and Were, therefore,
inclined to be less critical of things American than possibly the average.

Also there 1s admittedly among such a group an element of fear lest an
‘“iverse statement might jeopardize chances of entry into the United States,
The

i “eel, however, that these aspects are of minimal significance.
Hungarians are not a people whe mince words, and I had the impression that
i¢ Hungarians with whom I: spoke, with few exceptions, spoke frankly and
I made an especial effort to avoid any appearance of conducting
I am sure

the I

candidly. ¢

qivs tioning concerning rocio broadcasts and I believe that very few of
this was my particular interest.

Hho interviewees were aware that
( the pattern of the response which TI received would be torne out, at
least in its essentials, in similar interviews conducted among’ any of the

 

 

recent refugees from Hungary. .
The intervievs ee.
. CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO |
t DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR \JRELEASE
spcrep OF THISDOCUMENTO MARCH 2009C

 

  
 

CUL44 1023

 

The interviews revealed that virtually everyone in Hungary to whom
an adequate radio is available listens to broadcaste in the Hungarian
languare from western radio stations. Those people to whom an adequate
radio is not available include these rho either don't have radios, have —
radios such as the so~called People's Radio that are too weak to get
anything except Radio Budapest, or, as in the case of enlisted men in the
army, are simply not in a position to listen to western broadcasts. kven
the creat majority of people in these categories, however, seem to have
minaged, particularly during the past year, to keep abreast of the news |
from the west by reports from trusted friends with radios. They were
usually well aware of the broadcasts, ould almost always name the major
western stations such as VOA, RFE and BBC, and occasionally knew even
individual programs.

Basic listening habita do not vary greatly on the basis of social, | |
intellectyal, or financial position. All who can, including allegedly even
the communist officialdom, listen with great regularity to news programs
broadcast in the Hungarian language by western media. There 149 seemingly
vniversal awareness that Radio Budapest is purely a propagands: mouthpiece
which is utterly unreliable, and the popularity of western | gadcasts rests
to an overwhelming degree on the simple fact that they are yeonds
available source for the truth both about what is happening ih the.
world and within the orbit. ,

  
 

 

Views on non-news programs varied, but not so much on the basis of
group differences as simply on the personal preferences of the individual
listener, Thus a young person long active in the-resistance wanted more:
commentaries of the hard-hitting type "which appeal to the hot Hungarian
temperament", A scientist heartily condemned such commentaries and wanted
only newa, careful objective commentary and programs bringing the best of

‘ western culture. A young jazz fan felt that American statdons (by which

 

Feedage ARR CADET SA PT CEs ee

he specified VOA and RFE) should broadcast only the news, cut out. the

commentaries and the local "Hungarian appeal" program and play quantities |
of American jass. And so on, Only laborers and peasants ag a group seened
to show a reaction generally common to the group. They tended to be J
uncritical of the programs providing only that the news and other programs 24):
were aimed at Hungarian interests, i

 

Listening was considered more dangerous by these of higher initeLie ot
than by the laborers and peasants probably because the former were more often
the targets of the regime's wrath, None talked about what they heard
except within the family and circles of intimate friends, This situation
gradually changed over the past yéar, particularly since the XXth Party
Congress in Moscow, Many said that even before October 23°1t was. possih:
to walk down the street and hear western radio broadcasts coming over |
vadios in houses along the street. The regime apparently did very litgp
to curb this. Since October 23 listening had been overt and, as might:®
expected, has become more intense and constant. Many people reported
simply devote all of their free time to listening, hopefully, to
western radies for the latest news, Refugees who left Hungary a5

   
   
 
 

recently as

ob Ame gt ar
 

CUL441023

age
“ete 3
ABS be eo
Pee. eL hue . woohoo,

‘SP APSR ERE Me We fe 2

  

recently as the second week in Reagiber roported raat ete contimien

to be the cage,

It is of interest that vary fen persons ‘among those inierviawed, even
those with a good command of English or some other western Buropean }:
professed to have been interested in or ever to have listaned extensively

 

_./ to regular western Buropean radio stations, The usual explanation for this.

7 of ‘was that they found the stations hard to receive and the progrems generally
‘yninteresting; the news programs often had nothing te say about Hungary and

“Yn terms of both reception and language were harder to understand than those

bat breadcast in Hungarian by western media. Those few who said thay did listen.

regularly to English, French or German broadcasts said they did so either
besause they felt it sanewhat safer or because it gave them nome fooling
of escape,

Cartain specific ques tions. Nee raised in the Department's. telegram of.
instruction concerning the interviews. These and the answers thergtg,on the
basis of information obtained from the interviews fallow; Pe

   
 
   
   

(1) Do the refugees consider that the United States radio anal Wiih
campaign over the period of years preceding October 23, 1956, had. ae te
purpese the instigation of armed révolt? : :
The refugees definitely do not consider that thagjnited. States radia”.
campaign as represented by both the Voice of /jmerica’id Radio Free Bandpy..
(the only two American radio broadeasts with which they are familiar) hades |
its purpose the instigation of armed revolt. No one. with whom I spoke «ime.

  

sugested the idea and when I mentioned that there were charges circul®
in some of the western press that these broadcasts of ther attempted ee

and armed revolt, they scoffed at puch charges: an ‘absurd and probably
commnist inspired.. os

Insofar as the pamphlet {balioon) campaign is concerned, ne pe
interviewed by me voluntary mentioned ever having: seen a balloon or: having
found a pamphlet. JI did not. ask direct questions concerning balloons but
rather a general question as ta whether they vere aware of any way other thar,
by radio in which news of commntoations from the weet entered Hungary. =
Letters, scientific and academe publications and scoamtonal ‘Rewapapers were
all mentioned, but never balloons or. pamphlets. :

The Hungarians appear to consider the United States radii  eahpedign. Sima
and has as its purpose a contimiing expression of interest, by the United
States in the plight of the Hungarian nation, and a contribution to. the
Hungarians own efforts to maintain. their national sclf-reapact. and national .
consciousness in the face of Soviet efforts to destroy them.

Asked what they think did qauae the revolt, the great majority: repli
that it was a cominedion of the TART SADR | inbelpnatite: reacts: and’ .

 

 

     

 

 
 

CUL44 1023

  

sootal eondttions and the Loosening of the Soviet ep after ‘tie 5
c AntY eas. The pent-up hetred ani the growing hope ‘of release which | .
accompani.d awareness of avents sueh as the Potnan tots, Tito's Crimea _

‘ait, the rreater freedom to critdeise initiated by the Hungarian etek a
noekegy and seized on avidly by the students, end finebly the: Cara: viarh Me
to Felprade proviced the necessary ingredients, hey the AVO Spret- 3:
tne etill unarmed crowd at the Radio Building ii Bu es
it provided the svark *hieh ignited the revolutions

 

   
 
 

There were only two Wave in whieh ary of the pers Lerviiewed: :
ever associated United States radio broaicasts we th. the revolt, ‘both
tere very indirect, One was in praising the part that the Broadcas ta: raved,
in keeping the Hungarian spirit alive. The other. was in criticining
vroddcasts comparing the bad conditdons in Hungacty. with the good condttie
in the west on the grounds that such broadcasts N@Pely OgBravetgd.. voc.
tiscantent to no useful purpose since the Hungartens- ‘thenselyce "axe 10...

situation well enough without anyone telling thems | © 3 : 0

 

   
   
  
    
 
 

 
 

(2) What differences, if any, did refugees. nate as betrane: United :
States and other wesatera media, and.as between United States nna ee

or ever, - ownership of a radio, well aware ‘that there were shire major |
Hunverian Language broadeas ts from. the wes ts BBC. Yoa: anid RYE. aber ‘
was usually Me order ia vh7- - they 142bed +h em ‘Sy ‘prafersnee. Although
I did not question ary one :., detadl concerning sndgart wea? wenadcaste ¢
ascertain whether they really always knew to which stabgon they Were —
listening, I was satisfied from their awareness of broadoast. times nd
troadeast techniques that thay normally made an. acourate distinction, ee
A few refugees algo mentioned distinetions: betwaen: ah Mone “a Waa, re
hashington, but this wag always rather haays A | Soe ‘

 

  
 
  
   
  
 
 

As between. United: States and other western: wih 2
almast invariably came off second-best to thé only! real: rive
Hungarian Service: The two primary Yrezsons given: for theta. fi
mh? were: (a) BBC's news broadcests are relieble and: ob jactiy
at, Wungarian interests, and (b) BuC!s policies are "sert "
responsible and if has a reputation: for dependability, | ‘t6 ae
thab I encountered, this opinion "right across the beard", wie
variation between different social types and classes. oe

Other western. oF; at least, ngn-loscow: ‘controlled ‘pe t AIS Lug
Hungarian language breadeasts from. Spanish station from.2 Ugoe play
stations and, allegedly, from Turkey.» The Spaitieh retin Aepareney i

 
 

CU1441023

4

   

: etionely pr@dildethy and indulges itself in vehement donphoketsann and viohant
wand-fasciathé harangues which despite their cor net aaah wee i
peuitinely fine ‘Tittle echo in Hungary Loday. No, ‘one. had rise ua ia

‘Tie The Turkish station wes montiotied egualy
PAT: was never sure. that At WAR” rot wore t
: we

     
 
 
 

aparently Ldatened to by relatively fom and ane, 5 signitieand bade ah
Lhe Hungarian radio listening pattern. en ee aes

Preference for BBC hroadcasts ; however, did fide niga that ‘ite waa”
She most listened to of the western: stations. On the contrary, th. wee:
apparently hard. to receive and on the air a relatively. short te. RPE. See
“hich was normally easier to receive and was on the air all put a féw hour”
.aclavy benefitted the most from this and seems quite. gurely to have thei.
nighest number of listeners day in and day outs Although RFE appears. ite:

 

  
 
    
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  

nave suffered heavier jamming than othera this does not. pee. te oa Bes
re emane at Ly discouraged listeners. , Mt ; aR

On the other hand the most popular American stathen, Aceeteang ta. "ees
the refugees, was not RPE but VOA. Like BBC, however, VOA was Hot on. the, ees
2tr tong, enough per day to compete with RPE in tert of: ‘Listenershours..
The raaedns for VOA's popularity are’basieally the game ae these
emp licable to BBC ~ its news broadtagts were: straightforward and Ae ta
Yor seems to ‘Tene out to BBG. only in that its FoR Oe
es bab li. sed,

  

RPE generally was. - eritiotzed tor ite, ‘whine rie 3 | es
lack of objectivity and for frrespensibillty, Abeer eons tantly Mharged,
vith lravine made false promises, with. having: braadgast. YAGE rie mor
ns fact and wth having involved itself too direetay in. ei
On the other hand the minority when. suppor te proce 9 é
very aspects in RFE's favor, partioutary
suvpart given the Freedom Fighters: by uy
fron Freedom Fighter. Stations during.
the voice of Free Hungary itself. TA ‘oni
thet there are so many variations in- ‘individnal ‘pean tie oa i ‘
cenoralizations on this subject are aifricult, refugess hie
FE irmroved substantially after about November 7. ‘There. ware,
song whe Ware eritical of RFE's genarel polity. felon (4, WOR
praised: the role that RFE B pay aur anE: t Lita :

  

   
    
  
 

ee me ee eer ere — a

 

 

UE ———
 

CUL441023

 
 

(3) During the period Ooteber 23 to: Noventb er: x4, fe 1986, ware there : ae
any spacifie broadcasts whieh could be termed | inf hama Ox 7 Pees,

 

   

Of the three major stations broadcasting te | gary. dy RAR was”
accused by the refugees of having made broadcasts Which: phe have heen Ore:
termed inflammatory. The charges were relatively panereie honever, il a ae. |
had ne success in pinning anyone down to an eat hour: and: an exant ,

statemert of what the announcer actually said.

 

The most usual criticism took the form of. a. atatenient that the nan si
troadcests between. Novenber and Novemker 6 contributed diredtky to keepirig
hostilities alive since RFE in this period speaifieally told the Hungarian —
people that if they would keep up the fight for at least three days they —
vould have help from the United Nations. Persons mak ing this criticism
cenerally assert that they clearly understood this to mean that. U.N; troops
sould be sent to Hungary — some even said "I heard him say just that with.
ry own eara” - and many spparently fully expected that such troops wuld
come, In seeking more accurate details I usually found agreement that. :
these stat enents were made on broadeasts late at. night and concerned the .. _
resolution introduced in the U.N. by the Cuban (variously referred: to: By
the Hungarian refugees as the Italian, the Peruvian, ete.) delegate. EF poy ”
The RFE announcer apprrently. made statements te the effect that the. ee Be
vreedom Fighters. should keep up the resistance, that the U.N. was Wad. om
considering the Hungarian situation and preparing: to Bebe wo erat

 

 

Although none of those who charged REE with, Hericouragang* contin od nd
resistance would say, on further questioning, that dn: the: abeerte of RPE.
fighting would have ceased, Some did insis "that. lary parsoka: contin
ftghting in reliance on "promt res of help heard on MM

  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 

 

RFE was: also eritictzed ry. at Yeast 50. peéreant of the x

indirectly inflamnatery broadcasts | in that in the eriod after Geto

- and. again. after November: ) REE: ‘ty oatdant: toed gh:
f° there was: in fact no Fighting. RYE: broad ,

to gxeator activity on behal. of the evolll ten,

plortows hour, and generally. phages the cage.

Of _ trae netivities aha: by we ret Pag eee only.”

 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 

   

ee teat ‘there waa ‘fighting in that. town whan here
'  " ~ pefupees critdetised such Eroadoast# as undernitnth
dinveddately after November hy. in aneouraging host}
 Inpressiep of a mere effective: arned reetotanoe than
fbet verd able to achieve, ‘The mom inteLiigend of the
raised thesa charges were inebeaed ers exouse KEE, Howeray,:
that, they were reporting ough "newelt Es caw fa Ma 
  

 

ees ae ee ee a ee Tee en bs ee Se
CU1441023 , .

      

   
   
 
  

   

   

‘ Hike a
ne
4 Hi

 

 
 
  
 
 

vote

apparent Hy. Sroadea 6 ps ae

: _ respecte. ‘than. the” |
mes PR Romana, ‘mea simi

  
  
 
 
 
   

 

 
 
  
   

‘without, © and WON oh
but never oFiticiszed as a
resistance. oo Seige a we eek

   
    
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
  

I very stray ‘pedeived.
are interested in: UUatening £6
majord ty, prefer, coms commentary: 42).
news. ory posaibly..eyen-hetter,

on world developments... Boatdonsl

from the: Hungarian point.of view :

appealand dees run. the risk’. £
also runs the risk .of provokdir

_ minds. af the. iia hengra i. foy’

- strong. impresston,- hat RFE we

the clains of the formar Landsomy
condi tions Jn AONE pat 3;

the

 

jes

  
 

js oa

  

(oath Usually: this charge Lpvode 3
yonder auortion 9. aheve. oo

 
  

7 ane fran thd. there ware. a tan

  
 
   

OO _
CUL441023

 

 

to be extended to Hungary > No. one’ genta one a newilig trae

broadcaste any promises of na tenes sania tine: ~ the foun ef aren nee .
tt Freedom Fivhters . . ag . wdhiv sy ate site. eee

 

Se eee On 2 preatly - smpreweed by the fact that aeretin re isk j person ie a:
pe thage interviewed, quite without any apnarent cornection with hig: goaded
". paskground, income. or education, woyld express a preference for BRC, and
vould stress that the reason he liked it was beeatiae EBC news. ‘broadcasts:
were reliable. Similarly, VOA was quite regularly preferred over RFE for _
the same reason. Obviously the dominant reason for Hungerlan. listening to.
western broadcasts is to hear honest news and specifically. to hear clear,
accurate, well-presented news without embellishment. It: also seang? evident /
that unless the news is presented simply, acourately and relative |
objectively there is grave risk of serious misinterpretation by ee
listeners - this was nost dramatically demonstrated in the naeogerwtil ee:
concerning U,N. troops witich arose from the RPE broadcasts on. and
immediately after November l,,

   
   

I was impressed by the numer of persons interviewed who ixstiolnes

RFE as not being a "serious" station. I interpreted the word "surtoug!
when used by the refugees in this context to meen that théy didnot —
consider RFE a dependable and responsible station speaking accurately ang.

with authority concerning the policses and views of the United States —
Government or any other western European government, This interpretation
was borne out by further questioning. This critdeism, particularly the |
charge that it is not a responaiblé amd reliable. stétion, Woold. indicate:
failure by RFE. to develop the degree of contidenae. in Ate. meaner an po no
integrity necagsary to assure m ” asi : effecti a Ome gH e > a8 on :

 

  

tee , bin:

sought to incite the » Hone: eipite to Henoneimethoas we mh Peele bt “) oS Page

received a strong impression that edb: RFE broadaasiy pisen Ootar er 23, oe oe
and speeifically those by the catimentator called "Gallic hich»

anddirectly app or ted the révolutignery CANS, oven to ie. aint 4

calling. on all Hungarian citisens to support the ‘igh ters. arm 7:
eo out on strike, came dangerously chome to the bardarline ‘af inoitenent. the wa
 pefupees general ly felt that such programs were damaging rather than |

‘igiolpful. The excessive suppor t gave unjustified hepos of western =. 7 = ' oe a
BRistance and the outspoken emetiensl identity with: Hur rlan igeresy van ed
Ss not nearly as helpful ae straight re-broadeasita of savant | Brom :
‘readom Fighter. Stations and similar fortis of ac ti J SBEL BS noes

 

    
 
 
 

ed
ane eels
yeu.

 
    
 

 

 
 
  

   

 

The refugees with whom I spoke: Beened in peer ai to. have Ps Vang. ta Eas re 2
idea as to exactly what type of a station RPL ies eet aseunetl thet it”
was some sort of an officially-spontored Ameri can station. ‘fut nat: _

of fpial,
 

CUL44102Z35 .

  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  

 

 

 
   
 

 

 

      
  

   
 

i
|
| ae on Ty
a 2Ptke tad Asiomtoan Atop bien whe
Oo Pere op ioig tt: RYE ae 4 statian i
wy Bede they regily. Felt. Ab wap ‘the: 8 OF RRO
: + Seidler. I was topranese ‘ ents’. of 3
| ues BN: Lafiguage | Mrowesetas CE +6 wietg te
Ye ‘ mhree primary western stations Broaticast,
Ee tha thee. most. papular avid: vega arly. heard
even: Radio Budapest), Unless. the Hing arte
radically or the regine Brine Suniel
it-vould sean. that any of th age. ou
snffi¢kent Listening sudi.snce ode
Per dave | , + om Peewee
on: the bavis Of the. tovedelnig adc on n the beens of the et
information which T amagaed from the interviews; F tented 1g
conclusions concerning the. Putene ef the ° Uni tot ‘Saae Pa
toward Hungary. : Ne :
| 2) It is absolutely | essan tiny to the. Nitupw’ effectivehaen af pe:
United States ratio eampsign. tn. ungary that news brobdgaste. be bot merely
riven priority, but thet max itu cape: be. taken - ta: Aasure ‘te -@tenr a a
an] clarity of presentation of’ big Antal i: “apoure that Ley Bre. oe ee

| Leading: or budid fabse hopse,’ | TD Thine: ‘a heed at

   
 
  
  
 
 

i
Cyd *+Sobabls, th ey. ‘Should: ‘be okt gts 2s ie haar as"
, , a) “Commentary should 'p patente. 2
| &nstead emphasis should be placed ‘an
aes . Sevelopmen ts’ and the. ddasentnwhy
tee Bae responsible statesmen, Bech ath

ay - oMondersink: dire i

      
 

“for example, dr pope
it had S80 | she sc Yam 8

> = Beco’ — a ~
+ SARS ae SE is a —————
CUL441023 foe

Promvans anurt from ngs anc comacntary Jeserve possibly
roe ve tion fron the point of view or their entertainment value.
a eacuenidi 0 All types are surprisingly vopular, emphasis in these
a ren western rether than Hunporten music, but not entirely.

SECRET

 

f+: Fide SR a ee ae ee
